                                                                    211
                                                                    Low power consumption is
                                                                    not always a result of low
                                                                    supply voltages. The addi-
                                                                    tional signal processing
                                                                    required to maintain the
                                                                    same or maybe an even
                                                                    better dynamic range des-
                                                                    pite the reduction in supply
                                                                    voltage, may cause addi-
                                                                    tional power consumption.
                                                                       Good     examples     are
                                                                    sigma-delta (or delta-sigma)
                                                                    analog-to-digital converters.
                                                                    Their lowest supply voltage
                                                                    is 0.6 and even 0.5 V, which
                                                                    is largely suﬃcient to
be embedded in 65 and even 45 nm CMOS. The problem in these converters is that they have
to maintain the same dynamic range as their 1.8 V and higher counterparts.
  A low supply voltage always assumes that all circuit techniques are also applied to reduce the
power consumption. This Chapter explains what circuit techniques are available to realize low
power Delta-Sigma converters at very low supply voltages.
  Many of these circuit techniques will become important once nanometer CMOS have become
mainstream.


                                                                   212
                                                                   To initiate this Chapter, a
                                                                   few essential aspects of
                                                                   Delta-Sigma converters are
                                                                   reviewed. This is a very
                                                                   short introduction to Delta-
                                                                   Sigma converters. For more
                                                                   thorough      understanding,
                                                                   the reader is referred to
                                                                   more detailed references
                                                                   such     as    Northsworthy
                                                                   (Wiley), Schreier (Wiley)
                                                                   and Johns-Martin (Wiley).
                                                                      Most low-power Delta-
                                                                   Sigma       converters   use
                                                                   switched-capacitor ﬁlters for
                                                                   the noise shaping. Switches
become a problem however, for such low supply voltages. They are discussed ﬁrst.
  Rather than use switches, the opamps can be switched themselves. Today, many very-low-
voltage Sigma-Delta converters use this technique. The principle will be explained, followed by
a number of design examples.
  Finally, some of the most recent low-voltage Delta-sigma converters are discussed. Some of

                                              637
638                                                                                      Chapter #21

them use series resistors at the input, some others use full feedforward. They are discussed and
compared on the basis of a commonly agreed Figure of Merit.


                                                                       213
                                                                       A Sigma-Delta Analog-to-
                                                                       digital converter samples
                                                                       the incoming analog signal
                                                                       at a frequency, which is
                                                                       much higher than needed.
                                                                       The minimum sampling
                                                                       frequency according to
                                                                       Nyquist, is twice the maxi-
                                                                       mum frequency of the
                                                                       incoming signal. For low-
                                                                       quality speech, the band-
                                                                       width is limited to 3.4 kHz.
                                                                       The minimum sampling fre-
                                                                       quency would be 6.8 kHz.
                                                                       An ECG (Electro Cardio
                                                                       Gram) is limited to about
150 Hz. Its minimum sampling frequency would be 300 Hz.
   In Sigma-Delta ADCs the sampling frequency is much higher, 20 to 1000 times, depending on
the application. The ratio of this sampling frequency to the minimum Nyquist sampling frequency
is called the oversampling ratio (OSR). It is the ﬁrst design parameter in a Sigma-Delta converter.
The more the incoming signal is over-sampled, the more the signal information is emphasized
with respect to the noise. As a result, the SNR (Signal-to-Noise Ratio) will be higher for an
higher oversampling ratio (OSR). The resolution of the ADC will be higher for an higher
oversampling ratio (OSR).
   We can state that the high oversampling leads to higher resolution. A Sigma-Delta ADC
exchanges speed for resolution.
   To eﬀectively obtain this higher SNR however, the noise must be ﬁltered out. This is achieved
by noise shaping. This is realized by a ﬁlter H(f ).
   A Sigma-Delta converter consists of a feedback loop with a ﬁlter and a quantizer, which
carries out the AD Conversion. The feedback loop is closed over a DAC. A preﬁlter (anti-aliasing
ﬁlter) is required to make sure the incoming bandwidth is limited. A post ﬁlter (decimator ﬁlter)
is applied to lower the sampling frequency to what satisﬁes Nyquist.


214
The largest error in such an ADC converter is the quantization noise. This is actually not noise
but the diﬀerence between the original analog signal and the analog signal, quantized with a
limited number of bits.
   An example is shown in this slide. The original analog signal is the dotted sine wave. The
sampled and quantized analog signal for 4 bit (or 16 steps) is shown in full line. The diﬀerence
is in the middle. It is small in amplitude, depending on the number of bits (B) taken. Moreover,
it contains many diﬀerent frequencies. This is why it is called noise. It is the quantization noise.
It is the noise which determines the Signal-to-Noise ratio of the converter and hence its resolution.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                                639

                                                                        The size of one single step
                                                                     is the reference voltage
                                                                     divided by 2B in which B is
                                                                     the number of bits; for 8 bits
                                                                     this is 256. For a reference
                                                                     voltage of 1 V, this step is
                                                                     about 4 mV. This is barely
                                                                     larger than mismatch or
                                                                     oﬀset. Additional techniques
                                                                     will be required to enhance
                                                                     the SNR. Noise shaping is
                                                                     such a technique. For this
                                                                     purpose, a noise ﬁlter is
                                                                     included in the feedback
                                                                     loop. This is explained in the
                                                                     next slide.
                                                                        For 8 bits, the number of
256 corresponds to 48 dB. The precise value is 2 dB higher, which is 50 dB. For 16 bits we ﬁnd,
in a similar way 98 dB, which is a very high number indeed, this is required by a limited number
of applications such as audio CD’s and some others.


                                                                         215
                                                                         The minimum number of
                                                                         components of the Delta-
                                                                         sigma feedback loop are the
                                                                         noise ﬁlter H(f ), the quan-
                                                                         tizer and the DAC.
                                                                            For a single-bit converter,
                                                                         the quantizer is only a com-
                                                                         parator. The DAC then
                                                                         switches between two DC
                                                                         reference voltages.
                                                                            For multi-bit converters,
                                                                         the quantizer is a real ADC,
                                                                         such a ﬂash ADC or any
                                                                         other type, depending on the
                                                                         speed required. The DAC is
                                                                         then a real multi-bit DAC,
in which linearity is one of the main speciﬁcations. The higher number of bits, the larger the
resolution can be. This is the second design parameter of a Sigma-delta converter, i.e. the number
of bits.
   Many Sigma-Delta converters stick with one single bit conversion as a comparator and a
switch from DC reference voltages are so easy to realize. Matching is hardly an issue for single-
bit converters.
   It is clear that for the incoming input signal x, the transfer function is as given in this slide. If
H(z) has a high magnitude, the gain is about unity.
   For noise signals, generated in the feedback loop by the quantizer (comparator) for example,
640                                                                                       Chapter #21

the transfer function is very diﬀerent. If H(z) has a high magnitude, the quantization noise is
reduced considerably. The SNR also increases considerably.
  A simple example with a low-pass ﬁlter is given next.



                                                                       216
                                                                       The simplest possible feed-
                                                                       back loop with such a noise
                                                                       ﬁlter H is shown in this slide.
                                                                       Its gain is k . The (quantiza-
                                                                                     1
                                                                       tion) noise or error signal in
                                                                       general is represented by e.
                                                                       The feedback loop is closed
                                                                       over a block with gain k .
                                                                                                   2
                                                                          From the network equa-
                                                                       tions it is clear the gains for
                                                                       the incoming signal x and
                                                                       for the error signal e are very
                                                                       diﬀerent indeed.
                                                                          For a large loop gain
                                                                       1+k k H, the gain for the
                                                                             1 2
                                                                       incoming signal is 1/k ,
                                                                                                     2
whereas the gain for the error signal (quantization noise) can be quite small. This latter ﬁlter
action is the actual noise shaping.
  This is evident if a ﬁrst-order low-pass ﬁlter is taken for ﬁlter H, as shown next.



                                                                        217
                                                                        When a low-pass ﬁlter of
                                                                        ﬁrst order is taken for H,
                                                                        with cut-oﬀ frequency f
                                                                                                    m
                                                                        and slope −20 dB/decade,
                                                                        the contribution of the error
                                                                        (noise) signal in the output
                                                                        y shows an inverted charac-
                                                                        teristic. Its contribution is
                                                                        low at frequencies below f
                                                                                                    m
                                                                        and it increases at 20 dB/
                                                                        decade for higher frequen-
                                                                        cies. The noise is pushed
                                                                        towards higher frequencies.
                                                                           At low frequencies, the
                                                                        SNR is the ratio of x/k and
                                                                                                2
                                                                        e/k k H. This is propor-
                                                                            1 2
tional to k , which is the gain in the forward path of the feedback loop. The higher this gain,
            1
the higher the SNR.
   Also, the higher the order of the ﬁlter, the steeper the slope of the noise beyond frequency f .
                                                                                                   m
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                           641

Higher-order ﬁlters allow higher values of k . As a result, higher-order ﬁlters give rise to higher
                                            1
SNR values.
  The order of this ﬁlter is therefore the third design parameter of a Sigma-delta converter.
Recall that the other two are the oversampling ratio OSR and the number of bits B of the
quantizer.



                                                                     218
                                                                     Normally, third-and fourth-
                                                                     order ﬁlters are used. A ﬁrst-
                                                                     order Sigma-Delta is rarely
                                                                     used because it shows pat-
                                                                     terns in the output spectrum
                                                                     which are hard to remove.
                                                                        Second-order Sigma-delta
                                                                     converters are easy to real-
                                                                     ize. Since only a second-
                                                                     order ﬁlter is involved, no
                                                                     problems arise with respect
                                                                     to stability. Their noise
                                                                     shaping capability is some-
                                                                     what limited, however.
                                                                        Third-order and fourth-
                                                                     order converters are used
most (see slide). To go higher is diﬃcult because of stability problems.
   Fourth-order ﬁlters in a single feedback loop as shown in this slide, are risky but feasible. It
is better to organize them in a Mash or cascaded topology as shown next.



                                                                      219
                                                                      A 4th-order Mash (or cas-
                                                                      caded) topology has four
                                                                      ﬁlter sections for 4th order
                                                                      noise shaping. Only two of
                                                                      them are in a single feedback
                                                                      loop. Stability is easily
                                                                      achieved.
                                                                         It has three outputs how-
                                                                      ever, which are fed to a
                                                                      so-called noise-cancellation
                                                                      circuit. This means that the
                                                                      three outputs must receive
                                                                      the right gain and the right
                                                                      delay so that the noise can-
                                                                      cels. Matching will now be
                                                                      an issue. However, many
realizations have shown that matching is not really a problem.
642                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                     2110
                                                                     The values of the SNR
                                                                     which can be achieved
                                                                     depending on the values of
                                                                     the three design variables
                                                                     are given in this slide.
                                                                     However, for all of them
                                                                     single-bit quantization is
                                                                     taken.
                                                                        The SNR is given versus
                                                                     the OSR and for diﬀerent
                                                                     orders of noise-shaping. The
                                                                     higher the OSR and the
                                                                     noise-shaping order, the
                                                                     higher the SNR.
                                                                        The same SNR can there-
                                                                     fore be achieved for either
higher OSR or for higher noise-shaping. For example, 80 dB SNR (corresponding to 13 bit
resolution) can be realized by either an OSR of only 14 requiring 4th order noise shaping, or by
an OSR of 50 allowing only 2nd order noise shaping. Which one is preferable?
   Fourth-order noise shaping may require a Mash topology, which requires tougher matching
conditions. High OSR values on the other hand, require higher-speed opamps which require
more power consumption.
   This is the trade-oﬀ. For high-speed Sigma-Delta converters low values of OSR’s are preferred,
leading to stability and matching considerations. For low-power Sigma-Delta converters, low
values of OSR’s are also preferred, leading to similar considerations.

                                                                    2111
                                                                    The use of more bits for the
                                                                    quantization also increases
                                                                    the maximum SNR.
                                                                       In this graph M stands for
                                                                    multibit;
                                                                    – M4 thus stands for 4 bit
                                                                       quantization,
                                                                    – C211 stands for 4th-order
                                                                       noise shaping with a
                                                                       2–1–1 Mash or cascaded
                                                                       topology; note that a 2–2
                                                                       Mash topology oﬀers
                                                                       less SNR,
                                                                    – SL4 stand for a 4th-order
                                                                       single-loop topology.
                                                                    It is clear that a 4-bit 4th-
order noise shaping is by far the best.
  It is also clear that 3rd-order noise shaping provides lower SNR values. This is true for both
a 2–1 Mash topology (C21) and for a 3rd order single-loop topology (SL3).
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                        643

  From this it can be concluded that multibit Sigma-delta realizations oﬀer the highest SNR
values for low OSR values. If matching problems have to be avoided however, single-bit solutions
are quite attractive provided 4th order noise shaping is used in a 2–1–1 Mash topology.

                                                                    2112
                                                                    Now that we know which
                                                                    topology is most attractive,
                                                                    we have to focus on the
                                                                    implementation.
                                                                      Most noise-shaping ﬁlters
                                                                    are realized with switched-
                                                                    capacitor techniques. How-
                                                                    ever, for low supply volt-
                                                                    ages, the switches are
                                                                    diﬃcult to realize.
                                                                      This is discussed next.




                                                                  2113
                                                                  The supply voltage de-
                                                                  creases for decreasing chan-
                                                                  nel lengths. For 0.25 mm
                                                                  channel length, the supply
                                                                  voltage was 2.5 V; for
                                                                  0.18 mm CMOS it was 1.8 V
                                                                  and so on. For 90 nm
                                                                  CMOS the supply voltage is
                                                                  about 1.2 V. Supply voltages
                                                                  will now be used below 1 V.
                                                                     With a 1 V supply voltage
                                                                  the MOST switch is diﬃcult
                                                                  to turn on.
                                                                     Assume that a transmis-
                                                                  sion gate is used as a switch,
                                                                  with a nMOST in parallel
with a pMOST, as shown in this slide, The nMOST Gate is driven with a positive (supply)
voltage to turn it on. The pMOST is at the same time driven with the most negative voltage
or ground.
   For zero input voltage V , the Gate drive of the nMOST is the full supply voltage V , its
                            in                                                            DD
V     also equals V . This is suﬃcient to provide a low ON-resistance.
  GSn              DD
   Indeed, assume that the V is about 0.6 V and the minimum V −V for conduction is about
                             T                                GS     T
0.2 V, the minimum V is now about 0.8 V. As a result, the input voltage V can only increase
                       GS                                                  in
until it reaches V –0.8 V. For higher input voltages, the nMOST can no longer be turned on.
                  DD
644                                                                                       Chapter #21

  The same is true for the pMOST device. The input voltage V can only decrease until it
                                                                  in
reaches 0.8 V. For lower input voltages, the pMOST can no longer be turned on.
  This establishes a minimum value for the supply voltage V       which is the sum of both V
                                                            DDmin                            GS
values. In this example this is 1.6 V.

                                                                      2114
                                                                      The same story is given in
                                                                      this slide. The output con-
                                                                      ductance (inverse ON resis-
                                                                      tance) is given for input
                                                                      voltages from zero to the
                                                                      supply voltage V .
                                                                                        DD
                                                                         In both cases, the
                                                                      nMOST conducts for low
                                                                      input voltages and the
                                                                      pMOST for high input volt-
                                                                      ages. For a large supply
                                                                      voltage (5 V), there is a large
                                                                      region in the middle where
                                                                      both the nMOST and
                                                                      pMOST conduct, giving
                                                                      rise to a small total ON-
                                                                      resistance.
   However, for a small supply voltage (1 V) there is a hole in the middle. None of the MOSTs
can be turned on. For such a low supply voltage it is therefore not possible to construct a
nMOST/pMOST switch combination which conducts for all input voltages.
   How can we solve this problem?
   Note that in the plots in this slide, the V ’s have been substituted by the V ’s themselves. In
                                              GS                                  T
this way, the lowest possible V ’s values have been taken into account. There may still be some
                                GS
leakage because of the weak-inversion operation but this has been neglected.

                                                                       2115
                                                                       The same story is repeated
                                                                       once more but for the
                                                                       ON-resistances themselves.
                                                                       The numerical values of the
                                                                       ON-resistances are plotted
                                                                       for input voltages going
                                                                       from zero to the supply volt-
                                                                       age V .
                                                                               DD
                                                                          The numerical values cor-
                                                                       respond to an older CMOS
                                                                       process with rather large V
                                                                                                      T
                                                                       values (0.9 V). The W/L
                                                                       ratios are ﬁve.
                                                                          It is clear that for a supply
                                                                       voltage of 5 V, there is a
                                                                       large region in the middle
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                        645

where both transistors conduct. This region disappears when the supply voltage is lowered to a
value which is roughly the sum of the two V ’s or 1.8 V in this example.
                                               T
  As a consequence, such a transmission gate with a nMOST/pMOST parallel combination
cannot be used any longer for supply voltages below the sum of the V ’s. This is 1.8 V in this
                                                                          T
example. For present days V ’s of
                              T
  0.35 V, this is about 0.7 V. This is lower than 1 V, but not signiﬁcantly!


                                                                    2116
                                                                    What solutions are available
                                                                    for using switches at supply
                                                                    voltages below the sum of
                                                                    the threshold voltages?
                                                                      The ﬁrst one is to ask for
                                                                    a modiﬁcation in technol-
                                                                    ogy. Normally the V ’s are
                                                                                          T
                                                                    determined for optimum
                                                                    performance of the digital
                                                                    part. This means that nowa-
                                                                    days two diﬀerent oxide
                                                                    thickness are often avail-
                                                                    able. The thinner ones oﬀer
                                                                    lower V ’s and higher
                                                                               T
                                                                    speeds. The thicker ones
                                                                    provide larger values of V
                                                                                               T
and lower leakage currents. This latter is the low-power process.
  The high-speed process now provides lower V values. It is ideally suited to provide switches
                                                  T
which can switch all input voltages. The leakage current is higher, however. As a result, the
switch may be diﬃcult to switch oﬀ !
  Another solution is to use voltage multipliers. They are circuits which provide DC output
voltages which are higher than the supply voltage V . This higher voltage can now be used to
                                                     DD
drive the Gates of the switches.
  The main problems of such multipliers are their low power eﬃciency. Moreover, they may
cause reliability problems for the thin Gate oxides.
  Another alternative is not to use these switches any more, but to switch the preceding opamp.
This is called the switched-opamp approach.
  All three alternatives are now discussed in more detail.


2117
The ﬁrst alternative is to lower the value of the V . Smaller V values require smaller V
                                                      T           DD                           T
values! How far can this go?
   A small value of V causes the weak-inversion part of the i −v characteristic to cross the
                     T                                        DS GS
axis of zero V . In other words, even for zero V , some current ﬂows. This is called the leakage
              GS                                GS
current. This means that all digital gates conduct current even when switched oﬀ.
   Lowering the V causes excessive power consumption. A minimum value seems to be about
                  T
0.3 V (Ref. Rabaey).
   Most chips operate at higher temperatures, however. Chip temperatures of up to 100°C higher
646                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                    than room temperature are
                                                                    common. Since the thresh-
                                                                    old voltage V decreases
                                                                                    T
                                                                    with about 2 mV/°C, it can
                                                                    be 0.2 V lower than at room
                                                                    temperature. The leakage
                                                                    current is weak inversion
                                                                    depends on the V in an
                                                                                        GS
                                                                    exponential way, increasing
                                                                    by nearly a factor of ten per
                                                                    100 mV. At high chip tem-
                                                                    peratures, the leakage cur-
                                                                    rent can now be about 2
                                                                    orders of magnitude larger.
                                                                    The choice of the V must
                                                                                          T
                                                                    compensate this. The V
                                                                                                T
                                                                    cannot be chosen too small!
Values of 0.3 to 0.4 V have become common nowadays.
   Finally, mismatch causes a large spreading of the V values. The actual V value can thus be
                                                       T                   T
a lot lower than expected. Again, the leakage current depends on the V in an exponential way.
                                                                      GS
The V cannot be selected too small!
       T



                                                                    2118
                                                                    Voltage multipliers are used
                                                                    to generate DC voltages
                                                                    which are higher than the
                                                                    supply voltage V . This
                                                                                        DD
                                                                    high voltage is now used to
                                                                    drive the Gates of the
                                                                    nMOST switches. Little cur-
                                                                    rent is required as they only
                                                                    drive Gates. They can there-
                                                                    fore be realized with little
                                                                    additional power.
                                                                      They consist of a series of
                                                                    diodes and capacitors orga-
                                                                    nized in a number of stages.
                                                                    Instead of diodes, diode-
                                                                    connected MOSTs can be
used. They are driven by an oscillator.
   The larger the number of stages, the higher the output voltage. The larger the capacitors the
larger the output power. The most important parameter is doubtless the power eﬃciency. This
has improved many times since the original reference.
   This is why more attention is paid to it.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                           647

                                                                    2119
                                                                    The actual power eﬃciency
                                                                    g can be expressed in terms
                                                                    of an equivalent resistor R .
                                                                                                 eq
                                                                    It is also clearly a function
                                                                    of the output current.
                                                                       This loss resistor R is
                                                                                              eq
                                                                    proportional to the number
                                                                    of stages n, but inversely
                                                                    proportional to the clock
                                                                    frequency f and the size of
                                                                    the capacitor C used. There
                                                                    is an additional non-linear
                                                                    factor in this expression,
                                                                    which includes the switch
                                                                    resistance. This factor is less
                                                                    important to have an idea
about the orders of magnitude.
   It can be concluded that a voltage multiplier generates an output voltage with the highest
eﬃciency, provided as few stages are used as possible, but with the highest possible capacitor
and clock frequency.
   Unfortunately, these are exactly the same conditions for a maximum of injection of spikes in
the substrate. Coupling to the sensitive analog parts can now be expected. This will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter 24.

                                                                   2120
                                                                   Voltage multipliers show
                                                                   several more drawbacks.
                                                                      They generate higher
                                                                   voltage than the supply volt-
                                                                   age. Care must be taken not
                                                                   to exceed the maximum
                                                                   voltage on the thin Gate
                                                                   oxides.
                                                                      At about 0.8 V/nm thick-
                                                                   ness an oxide breaks down.
                                                                   A CMOS technology of
                                                                   0.18 mm has an oxide thick-
                                                                   ness of about 1/50th or
                                                                   3.6 nm. This would break
                                                                   down under a voltage of
                                                                   about 2.9 V. The standard
supply voltage for 0.18 mm CMOS is 1.8 V. This is suﬃciently far from the breakdown voltage.
  However, if voltage multiplies are added, care has to be take not to end up too close to the
breakdown voltage. If not, reliability issues appear.
  A CMOS technology of 90 nm has an oxide thickness of about 1.8 nm, corresponding to a
breakdown voltage of about 1.5 V. The supply voltage is 1.3 V. Voltage multipliers are therefore
excluded!
648                                                                                      Chapter #21

  Another disadvantage of voltage multipliers is that clock drivers are required to drive all the
capacitors. They take additional power and cause large spikes into the substrate. Substrate noise
and coupling is now hard to avoid.

                                                                      2121
                                                                      An interesting example of a
                                                                      voltage multiplier, which
                                                                      has been designed according
                                                                      to the rules of the previous
                                                                      slides, is given in this slide.
                                                                         It provides an output
                                                                      voltage which tracks the
                                                                      supply voltage V         but is
                                                                                          DD
                                                                      always 1 V higher. This
                                                                      diﬀerence of 1 V is used
                                                                      to realize a rail-to-rail in-
                                                                      put ampliﬁer with only
                                                                      one single input pair (see
                                                                      Chapter 11). As a result, the
                                                                      distortion can be made less
                                                                      than −80 dB.
   This operates with only two stages but with a fairly high clock frequency of 10 MHz. The
capacitors are selected fairly small. The ripple on this DC supply has been reduced by taking a
large capacitor C . Together with the voltage gain of transistor M5, this capacitor C allows a
                  o                                                                       o
reduction of the ripple to a mere 5 mV, for a 60 mA output current. This was necessary as the
voltage multiplier is not used only for Gate drives but to supply DC current to input
diﬀerential pair.
   It works for supply voltages of 1.8 V to 3.3V. It has been realized in 0.5 mm CMOS.
   For more details the reader is referred to the paper in reference.

                                                                       2122
                                                                       If switches cannot be used
                                                                       any more because of the low
                                                                       supply voltage, the whole
                                                                       opamp can be switched.
                                                                       This is called the switched-
                                                                       opamp approach.
                                                                          This is discussed next.
                                                                          The principles are ex-
                                                                       plained ﬁrst, followed by a
                                                                       few realizations.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                            649

                                                                       2123
                                                                       In a conventional switched-
                                                                       capacitor integrator, the
                                                                       input voltage v is sampled
                                                                                       IN
                                                                       on capacitor aC, when
                                                                       phase W1 is high. The two
                                                                       MOSTs labeled W1 then
                                                                       conduct whereas the other
                                                                       two are oﬀ.
                                                                         On phase W2, the charge
                                                                       aCv      is transferred to
                                                                           IN
                                                                       capacitor C. The resulting
                                                                       output voltage is now a
                                                                       multiplied by the input volt-
                                                                       age; the voltage gain is a.
                                                                         When a single supply
                                                                       voltage V is used, a DC
                                                                                  DD
reference voltage V      may have to be added, to make sure that the voltages at both the minus
                     REF
and plus inputs of the opamp never exceed the common-mode input range. A typical value is
0.2 V depending on the type of opamp.
   The main problem of this integrator when the supply voltage is small, is the input switch.
Indeed, if we take as an input voltage 0.5 V for a supply (and clock) voltage of 1 V (V =
                                                                                              REF
0.2 V), then all MOST switches receive a V of 0.8 V when switched in, except the input
                                                 GS
transistor. This latter one only receives 0.3 V and is not on at all! This is the problem.


                                                                      2124
                                                                      A solution is obtained by
                                                                      switching the preceding
                                                                      opamp. This obviously only
                                                                      works if several switched-
                                                                      capacitor integrators are put
                                                                      in series.
                                                                         Take the integrator in the
                                                                      frame. Its input switch on
                                                                      phase w2 has been shifted to
                                                                      the preceding opamp. The
                                                                      whole opamp is switched in
                                                                      and out at clock phase w2.
                                                                         In a similar way, the
                                                                      opamp within the frame is
                                                                      switched in and out at clock
                                                                      phase w1, in order to be able
to provide the input voltage to the next integrator.
   The last opamp shown is now switched at clock phase w2.
   It is easier to realize an opamp with a low supply voltage than to realize an input switch with
a low supply (or clock) voltage. Moreover, it is fairly straightforward to switch an opamp. This
is discussed next.
650                                                                                     Chapter #21

  The only problem left is the very ﬁrst input switch. At the input, a compromise will have to
be taken for the maximum input voltage. Alternative solutions will be discussed later in this
Section.

                                                                      2125
                                                                      The very ﬁrst switched
                                                                      opamp is shown in this slide.
                                                                         It is a two-stage Miller
                                                                      opamp, to which two
                                                                      switches have been added,
                                                                      i.e. nMOST M9 and
                                                                      pMOST M10.
                                                                         When the voltage of clock
                                                                      phase w is high, M10 is oﬀ
                                                                      and M9 is on. The opamp
                                                                      functions as expected.
                                                                         When the voltage of clock
                                                                      phase w is low however,
                                                                      M10 is on and shorts the
                                                                      Gate voltage of transistors
                                                                      M8, M7 and M5 to the
supply lines. All these transistors are therefore oﬀ.
  Also, M9 is oﬀ. Both stages of the opamp are switched oﬀ.
  How fast can an opamp be switched on and oﬀ depends on the loop gain of the feedback
arrangement. If the gain around the opamp is a, then its bandwidth is GBW/a. The corresponding
time constant for the output voltage is also the time constant for the switching in and out of the
whole opamp.
  This is shown next.

                                                                      2126
                                                                      This is the output voltage of
                                                                      the switched opamp of the
                                                                      previous slide, when it is
                                                                      switched out.
                                                                         The expected exponential
                                                                      is given by the dotted line.
                                                                      The time constant is indeed
                                                                      one over two times p times
                                                                      the bandwidth of the op-
                                                                      amp.
                                                                         A big hump occurs how-
                                                                      ever, after about 0.5 ms. This
                                                                      is a result of the discharge
                                                                      of the compensation capaci-
                                                                      tance C . It is a great deal
                                                                               c
                                                                      better to insert a switch in
series with this capacitor, not to allow it to discharge and charge, as will be shown later.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                          651

                                                                    2127
                                                                    A low-pass biquadratic ﬁlter
                                                                    using this technique, is
                                                                    shown in this slide.
                                                                       Each opamp is switched
                                                                    according to the switch of
                                                                    the next sampling capacitor.
                                                                    An extra switched opamp is
                                                                    added to provide the feed-
                                                                    back on phase 2.The mini-
                                                                    mum supply voltages for
                                                                    this realization is about
                                                                    1.5 V. In this older CMOS
                                                                    technology the V is about
                                                                                      T
                                                                    0.9 V and the V is 1.2 V
                                                                                     GS
                                                                    (for V −V #0.3 V). For
                                                                           GS    T
                                                                    an input voltage of 0.6 V ,
                                                                                             ptp
the minimum supply voltage is about 1.5 V.
  The input switch on phase 2 is the main problem. It limits the input range to V minus V
                                                                                 DD      T
or about 0.6 V.


                                                                    2128
                                                                    The low-pass ﬁlter charac-
                                                                    teristic is as expected. It
                                                                    shows a −40 dB/decade
                                                                    roll-oﬀ     for   frequencies
                                                                    beyond the bandwidth
                                                                    (which is 1.5 kHz), up to
                                                                    about half the clock fre-
                                                                    quency of 115 kHz.
                                                                       At low frequencies the
                                                                    gain is a factor of 2 or 6 dB.
                                                                       Let us observe the noise
                                                                    and distortion.




2129
The input noise is mainly the kT/C noise, typical for a switched-capacitor ﬁlter. It is therefore
fairly high.
   The distortion comes up rather strongly once the input signal has become so large that the
input switch cannot be fully switched on any more. This occurs at about 0.6 V input amplitude.
                                                                             ptp
The resulting DR is close to 70 dB which is typical for switched-capacitor ﬁlters.
   No additional disadvantages are present as a result of the switched opamp approach.
652                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                       The total power con-
                                                                    sumption (at this 2.4 mm
                                                                    CMOS       technology)     is
                                                                    110 mW at 1.5 V supply
                                                                    voltage. This is quite
                                                                    low. Indeed, an additional
                                                                    advantage of the switched-
                                                                    opamp approach is that the
                                                                    opamps are oﬀ 50% of the
                                                                    time. The power consump-
                                                                    tion is therefore halved as
                                                                    well, which is a considerable
                                                                    advantage.
                                                                       Even more power can be
                                                                    consumed when a class-AB
                                                                    stage is used at the output.
                                                                    This will be shown later.


                                                                    2130
                                                                    The input switch is still a
                                                                    problem in the switched-
                                                                    opamp approach discussed
                                                                    before. Improved input
                                                                    switching is now required.
                                                                       Moreover, the switching
                                                                    of the opamp causes tran-
                                                                    sients which are unaccept-
                                                                    able. Possible remedies are
                                                                    discussed next.




2131
The ﬁrst remedy is to make everything fully diﬀerential. A fully-diﬀerential opamp is now used,
as shown in this slide.
   It is a two-stage Miller opamp with a folded cascode as a ﬁrst stage. A second stage is needed
to provide rail-to-rail output swing. The gain can be quite high, 75 dB in this example.
   For a 1 pF load, the GBW is about 30 MHz, for only 80 mW power consumption. This gives
a high FOM indeed!
   The opamp can be switched in and out because of the four switches (in blue). Only the output
stage is switched in and out, by transistors M11. The input stage remains on, which improves
the settling time.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                          653

                                                                     Of more importance, is
                                                                  that    the     compensation
                                                                  capacitance CC has a series
                                                                  switch MS. The voltage
                                                                  across CC is therefore con-
                                                                  stant irrespective of the
                                                                  switching. The settling time
                                                                  is greatly improved by this
                                                                  arrangement.
                                                                     The minimum supply
                                                                  voltage     V       is   only
                                                                                DD
                                                                  V +V          or V +2 V       .
                                                                    GS    DSsat     T     DSsat
                                                                  For a V of 0.6 V, a V of
                                                                           T              DD
                                                                  1 V is easily achieved
                                                                  (V −V =0.2 V).
                                                                     GS    T
                                                                     Note that the inputs oper-
                                                                  ate close to ground. As a
result the whole supply voltage V is available for V of the input switch V .
                                  DD                  GS                     GS
   The average output voltage is about 0.5 V however, for maximum output swing. A level shifter
is required between output and input.



                                                                    2132
                                                                    Such a level shifter is imple-
                                                                    mented by addition of
                                                                    capacitor CDC. This capaci-
                                                                    tor is taken to be the same
                                                                    as capacitor CIN. The DC
                                                                    output voltage V is now
                                                                                       O
                                                                    found to be half the supply
                                                                    voltage V .
                                                                              DD
                                                                      This is explained in more
                                                                    detail next. The circuit is
                                                                    repeated twice, once at
                                                                    phase W1 and once at
                                                                    phase W2.
654                                                                                 Chapter #21

                                                                   2133
                                                                   Under phase W1, the ﬁrst
                                                                   opamp is switched oﬀ and is
                                                                   therefore left out. Capacitor
                                                                   C     ﬁnds itself between
                                                                     DC
                                                                   ground and the virtual
                                                                   ground, at the minus input
                                                                   of the opamp. It carries no
                                                                   charge.
                                                                      The total charge at the
                                                                   input is found on capacitor
                                                                   C , which is between
                                                                     IN
                                                                   supply voltage V and the
                                                                                      DD
                                                                   virtual ground.




                                                                2134
                                                                Under phase W2, the second
                                                                opamp is switched oﬀ and is
                                                                therefore left out. Capacitor
                                                                C now ﬁnds itself between
                                                                  DC
                                                                the supply voltage V and
                                                                                        DD
                                                                ground.
                                                                   Capacitor C now carries
                                                                                IN
                                                                charge V C . The total
                                                                           O IN
                                                                charge is therefore found, as
                                                                given in this slide. If capaci-
                                                                tors C and C are made
                                                                       DC         IN
                                                                equal, the DC output volt-
                                                                age V ends up at half the
                                                                      O
                                                                supply voltage.
                                                                   This sets the output and
                                                                input common-mode volt-
ages. All switches now have the full supply-voltage V as their V . This is also true for the
                                                     DD         GS
input switches.



2135
Similar level shifting is required in the Common-mode feedback circuit.
  Again, a capacitor C is added to provide 0.5 V level shifting, between the output of the ﬁrst
                         CM
opamp and the input of the CMFB opamp. The outputs are sampled and summed to cancel out
the diﬀerential output signals by capacitors C and C (see Chapter 8). The CMFB ampliﬁer
                                               P     M
has a pMOST diﬀerential pair at the input such that its input voltage is close to ground as for
the other opamps.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                   655

                                                                 Capacitors C are in par-
                                                                               FF
                                                              allel with C and C to pro-
                                                                          P        M
                                                              vide zeros in the CMFB
                                                              gain characteristic, to speed
                                                              up the CMFB performance
                                                              without adding more power
                                                              (see Chapter 8).
                                                                 These circuits have been
                                                              used to construct a second-
                                                              order ﬁlter with a 450 kHz
                                                              bandwidth (at 1.8 MHz
                                                              clock frequency). It con-
                                                              sumes only 160 mA at 1 V
                                                              supply voltage (with V Ys
                                                                                        T
                                                              of 0.65 V in 0.5 mm CMOS).
                                                              Its peak SNR is about
                                                              58 dB. The maximum input
                                                              voltage is 1.6 V , which is
                                                                               ptp
                                                              very high indeed.




                                                              2136
                                                              Even less power consump-
                                                              tion has been reached when
                                                              a class-AB ampliﬁer is used
                                                              as an output stage.
                                                                 Moreover, some other
                                                              design tricks can be applied
                                                              to minimize the power
                                                              consumption.
                                                                 They are collected in this
                                                              design example.




2137
The switched-opamp integrator is shown in this slide.
  It is fully-diﬀerential. The common-mode feedback is carried out by means of capacitors
C       . The CMFB circuitry itself is not shown.
 CMS,eq
  The functions of the various capacitors is fairly obvious.
656                                                                                   Chapter #21

                                                                      A DC level shift is again
                                                                    required as the average
                                                                    output voltage is at 50% of
                                                                    the supply voltage and the
                                                                    average input voltage close
                                                                    to ground. This is again
                                                                    realized by means of capaci-
                                                                    tors C .
                                                                           CM
                                                                      Note that the switches are
                                                                    such that the outputs of the
                                                                    opamp are at V , not to
                                                                                      DD
                                                                    forward bias the junctions of
                                                                    the switch transistors.




                                                                    2138
                                                                    The schematic of the 3rd-
                                                                    order Delta-Sigma con-
                                                                    verter is shown in this slide.
                                                                    A single-loop topology is
                                                                    selected as it consumes
                                                                    somewhat less power than a
                                                                    2–1 cascaded topology.
                                                                    Moreover, the gain require-
                                                                    ments per stage are less
                                                                    severe.
                                                                       The coeﬃcients have been
                                                                    obtained from Matlab simu-
                                                                    lations. Care is taken to
                                                                    optimize the output swings
                                                                    for all integrators. For an
                                                                    input swing of 0.2 V, the
output swings are respectively 0.36, 0.5 and 0.5 V.
   In order to avoid an additional opamp to set the timing of the clocks right, half delays are
introduced. They are digital and consume very little power.


2139
The opamp used is a class-AB ampliﬁer as shown in this slide. Class AB is preferred as it lowers
the quiescent current.
   It contains two input transistors M1 and M2 and a low-voltage current source M2, M3 and
M4. Transistors M2 serve as a source follower as its current is constant and equal to I . This
                                                                                        B1
is ensured by the feedback loop around transistors M2 and M3. As a result V       is constant as
                                                                              GS2
well. Input voltage V is transferred unattenuated to its Source.
                      in2
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                            657

                                                                         Input    transistor      M1
                                                                      receives thus the diﬀerential
                                                                      input voltage V −V as
                                                                                        in1    in2
                                                                      its V . This voltage is con-
                                                                           GS
                                                                      verted into a signal current
                                                                      by transistor M1 only. In
                                                                      this ampliﬁer, only one
                                                                      single transistor M1 con-
                                                                      verts the diﬀerential input
                                                                      voltage into a current.
                                                                      Moreover this transistor
                                                                      provides       a      class-AB
                                                                      characteristic.
                                                                         The signal current ﬂows
                                                                      through transistors M3 and
                                                                      is mirrored out by transistor
                                                                      M4. It can also be taken out
at the Drain of transistor M1 as shown in the full schematic, shown next.
   Finally, note that this ampliﬁer can operate on less than 1 V supply voltage. It only takes one
single V and V           to operate properly. If a V is taken of 0.6 V and a V        of 0.2 V, then
         GS        DSsat                            T                           DSsat
the minimum supply voltage V is 1 V. If however, a V is available of 0.3 V, then V can be
                                 DD                        T                               DD
as low as 0.7 V. This is quite low indeed!



                                                                      2140
                                                                      In the full schematic, the
                                                                      diﬀerential nature is clearly
                                                                      recognized.
                                                                         Input pMOST transistors
                                                                      M and M carry out the
                                                                         1b        1c
                                                                      input voltage to current
                                                                      conversion. The signal cur-
                                                                      rent through transistor M
                                                                                                  1b
                                                                      is now fed to the output by
                                                                      current mirror M          and
                                                                                           2a
                                                                      M , but also by current
                                                                         3a
                                                                      mirror M        and M . A
                                                                                 5b          6b
                                                                      diﬀerential output current is
                                                                      therefore obtained.
                                                                         Common-mode feedback
                                                                      is applied as currents
injected at the Drains of transistors M and M .
                                        5a     5b
   The opamps can be switched in and out by disconnecting all connections to the power supply
lines. This ensures a very fast recovery time.
658                                                                                         Chapter #21

                                                                          2141
                                                                          The class-AB characteristics
                                                                          are clearly visible in this
                                                                          slide.   They      give    the
                                                                          diﬀerential output current
                                                                          versus diﬀerential input
                                                                          voltage. They also show a
                                                                          curved class-AB character-
                                                                          istic.
                                                                             The biasing currents I
                                                                                                        B
                                                                          are only of the order of 1 mA.
                                                                          The W/L ratio in the current
                                                                          mirrors is about 120.
                                                                          Relatively large output cur-
                                                                          rents are now available.
                                                                             In the ﬁrst plot, several
                                                                          values are taken of the input
                                                                          transistors M and M .
                                                                                          1b          1c
The larger the input sizes, the steeper the characteristic.
  In the other plot the biasing current I is varied. As a result, the maximum output current
                                           B
varies with it.
  These two parameters allow shaping of the class-AB characteristic.



                                                                          2142
                                                                          Since this is a fully-
                                                                          diﬀerential ampliﬁer, CMFB
                                                                          is required.
                                                                             This is aﬀected by two
                                                                          sampling capacitors C ,
                                                                                                    CMS
                                                                          which cancel out the
                                                                          diﬀerential signal at their
                                                                          summation point, which is
                                                                          then fed to a diﬀerential
                                                                          ampliﬁer. As two diﬀerent
                                                                          currents are required to
                                                                          close the feedback loop, one
                                                                          side of the diﬀerential ampli-
                                                                          ﬁer is doubled.
                                                                             In order to realize the
                                                                          half-supply     level    shift,
capacitor C          is added, with equal size as capacitor C         .
              CMS2                                              CMS
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                          659

                                                                      2143
                                                                      The comparator for the
                                                                      single-bit conversion is
                                                                      shown in this slide.
                                                                         The comparator consists
                                                                      of a diﬀerential pair with
                                                                      transistors M1, loaded by a
                                                                      negative resistance (because
                                                                      of the positive feedback)
                                                                      with transistors M2. The
                                                                      gain is suﬃciently high to
                                                                      cause a regenerative action
                                                                      yielding a logic on one side
                                                                      and a zero on the other. It
                                                                      consumes about 6 mA.
                                                                         In such a comparator,
                                                                      normally a switch is re-
quired between the Drains of the input transistors M1. This switch is closed before the input
voltage is applied. As soon as the switch is opened, the regenerative action causes a logic one or
zero at the output, depending on the input signal.
  Because of the low supply voltage however, such a switch is not possible. This function is
taken up by the two switches M3. When they are switched oﬀ, regenerative action takes place.
  Note that the average input voltage is again close to ground.


                                                                     2144
                                                                     The input integrator does
                                                                     not have a preceding opamp
                                                                     which can be switched. The
                                                                     input signal will now be lim-
                                                                     ited in amplitude by the
                                                                     input switch.
                                                                        In this realization, the
                                                                     supply voltage is 0.9 V. The
                                                                     minimum voltage drive for
                                                                     the input switch is about
                                                                     0.65 V, barely larger than
                                                                     the threshold voltage. As a
                                                                     result, the maximum diﬀer-
                                                                     ential input voltage is about
                                                                     500 mV .
                                                                              ptp
660                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                   2145
                                                                   The output spectrum for the
                                                                   maximum input signal is
                                                                   shown in this slide.
                                                                      The noise ﬂoor at low fre-
                                                                   quencies is quite low. The
                                                                   integrated noise is shown as
                                                                   well. For an input signal of
                                                                   1 kHz, the SNR is about
                                                                   76 dB.
                                                                      Distortion is already
                                                                   clearly visible, however.
                                                                   Second-order distortion is
                                                                   present because of the
                                                                   single-ended input drive
                                                                   used for this measurement.
                                                                   The SNDR (signal to noise
and distortion ratio) is then only about 62 dB.
  The bandwidth is about 16 kHz, corresponding to an OSR of 48.

                                                                   2146
                                                                   Both the SNR and SNDR
                                                                   are given versus the input
                                                                   signal, for a supply voltage
                                                                   of 0.9 V.
                                                                      It is clear that distortion
                                                                   shows up at the high end,
                                                                   limiting the SNDR to values
                                                                   about 14 dB below the max-
                                                                   imum SNR.




2147
A microphotograph of this realization is shown in this slide. The ﬁrst integrator uses larger
capacitors (4 pF) to reduce the thermal kT/C noise. This means that for the ﬁrst integrator the
thermal noise is about equal to the quantization noise. For the other stages, the sampling
capacitor is only 0.6 pF. A unit capacitor of 0.2 pF has been taken.
   The power consumption has been minimized by reduction of the currents in the opamps to
their minimum. The current consumption of the ﬁrst stage is larger (33 mA) than for the other
stages (6 mA). The current consumption of the CMFB ampliﬁers is about the same as for the
diﬀerential ones.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                           661

                                                                         Their GBW values are
                                                                      only 2–3 times the clock fre-
                                                                      quency. They are all 4 MHz,
                                                                      to be compared with a clock
                                                                      frequency of 1.5 MHz.
                                                                         This means that for the
                                                                      ﬁrst integrator, the thermal
                                                                      noise is about equal to the
                                                                      quantization noise.
                                                                         Remember that in a
                                                                      switched-opamp approach
                                                                      the current consumption is
                                                                      halved by itself.
                                                                         As a result, the power
                                                                      consumption for this reso-
                                                                      lution and this bandwidth of
                                                                      16 kHz is very low. This will
be illustrated by the comparative Table at the end of this Chapter.



                                                                      2148
                                                                      Several other low-voltage
                                                                      Sigma-Delta       converters
                                                                      exist, which all address the
                                                                      problem of the series
                                                                      switches and in particular of
                                                                      the input switch.
                                                                         They all operate at supply
                                                                      voltages below 1 V.
                                                                         The operating principles
                                                                      are discussed next, followed
                                                                      by some discussion on their
                                                                      advantages and disadvan-
                                                                      tages.
                                                                         The unity-gain-reset prin-
                                                                      ciple is ﬁrst.




2149
In this principle, the opamp is always reset to ground. In this way, the input switch always has
the maximum V , even for small supply voltages.
                  GS
   In order to understand the principle, let us neglect the level shifters V /2. Also, the voltage
                                                                             dd
presented by the previous integrator is called V .
                                                 in
   During phase 1 (red), the charge on capacitor C is Q , which is C V . The signal voltage at
                                                    1     1             1 in
the output V is zero as this opamp is connected in unity-gain conﬁguration (except for a DC
              out
level shift).
662                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                     During phase 2 (blue),
                                                                  this charge C V is transfer-
                                                                                1 in
                                                                  red to capacitor C . The
                                                                                        2
                                                                  charge on this capacitor
                                                                  changes by an amount
                                                                  C V such that the output
                                                                    1 in
                                                                  voltage V changes by an
                                                                            out
                                                                  amount V C /C .
                                                                             in 1 2
                                                                     During this phase the pre-
                                                                  vious opamp is now reset to
                                                                  zero, as it is connected
                                                                  in unity-gain conﬁguration
                                                                  (except for a DC level shift).
                                                                     Each opamp has zero at
                                                                  its output during one phase
                                                                  and the output voltage
                                                                  during the other phase.
There is no problem with switches which have to pass a high signal level, and which have too
small a drive voltage V .
                       GS
   The disadvantage however, is that the output voltages have to swing over a large range for
each new clock phase. The Slew Rate must be quite high, leading to more power consumption
in the opamps.



                                                                   2150
                                                                   The opamp conﬁguration is
                                                                   shown in this slide.
                                                                      It is a pseudo-diﬀerential
                                                                   ampliﬁer. It consists of two
                                                                   equal but separate ampliﬁ-
                                                                   ers. Two stages are used for
                                                                   high gain and for large
                                                                   output swing.
                                                                      The GBW and the SR are
                                                                   quite high in view of the
                                                                   clock frequency of 10 MHz.
                                                                   The power consumption is
                                                                   quite low.
                                                                      Note that again DC
                                                                   level shifters are required
                                                                   between outputs and inputs.
For maximum output swing the average output voltage is 0.5 V (for a 1 V supply voltage)
whereas the average input voltage is close to ground. Such a level shifter can be realized by a
few switches and an additional capacitor, as shown before.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                         663

                                                                   2151
                                                                   This integrator is used in a
                                                                   second-order     sigma-delta
                                                                   modulator as shown in this
                                                                   slide. Half-delays are used
                                                                   for correct timing.
                                                                      The     input    sampling
                                                                   capacitance is 2 pF. The
                                                                   maximum SNR is 78 dB for
                                                                   20 kHz signal bandwidth
                                                                   (clock at 10 MHz). The total
                                                                   power consumption is 5.6
                                                                   mW at 1 V supply voltage.
                                                                      An 8 dB lower SNR is
                                                                   obtained for a 50 kHz
                                                                   input signal.
                                                                      Note that the distortion is
quite low, at the cost of high current consumption in the ampliﬁers, however.



                                                                    2152
                                                                    Another low-voltage, low-
                                                                    power Sigma-delta modula-
                                                                    tor is discussed next.
                                                                       It has been optimized for
                                                                    low power and has been
                                                                    realized in 90 nm CMOS. A
                                                                    low-power opamp is used
                                                                    with a class-AB output
                                                                    stage.
664                                                                                   Chapter #21

                                                                    2153
                                                                    A single-loop topology is
                                                                    preferred for low-power
                                                                    designs since it is less sensi-
                                                                    tive to circuit non-idealities
                                                                    such as low opamp gain,
                                                                    switch resistance and capac-
                                                                    itor mismatch.
                                                                       A clock is used of 4 MHz
                                                                    and an OSR of 100 to reach
                                                                    a signal bandwidth of
                                                                    20 kHz.
                                                                       The coeﬃcients are such
                                                                    that the same output swing
                                                                    is obtained for all integ-
                                                                    rators, which is about 80%
                                                                    of the reference voltage
(which is 0.6 V) at an input voltage of −3 dB.
  The minimum-gain requirement is only about 30 dB. This is easily achieved by a low-voltage
opamp as discussed next.



                                                                    2154
                                                                    As an opamp a symmetrical
                                                                    OTA is used.
                                                                       Current starving is used
                                                                    however, to increase the
                                                                    gain (see Chapter 7). At such
                                                                    a low supply voltage, too
                                                                    little room is available for
                                                                    cascodes.
                                                                       Current starving means
                                                                    that a DC current source
                                                                    takes away most of the DC
                                                                    current from the load tran-
                                                                    sistors M2. As a result, the
                                                                    AC impedance of these tran-
                                                                    sistors increase, giving rise
                                                                    to more gain. A large factor
                                                                    B is used as well.
  The ﬁrst ampliﬁer of this sigma-delta converter uses a k value of 0.8 and a B factor of 10.
  Actually, factor k indicates what fraction of the current through the input transistor M1 is
taken up by the DC current source. The small-signal resistance 1/g of transistors M2 increases
                                                                  m2
by a factor (1−k) in weak inversion, and so does the small-signal gain A.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                            665

                                                                      2155
                                                                      Care must be taken how-
                                                                      ever, not to increase the
                                                                      small-signal resistance 1/g
                                                                                                  m2
                                                                      too much. Indeed, a non-
                                                                      dominant pole p is formed
                                                                                        nd
                                                                      at this node.
                                                                        This pole p must be
                                                                                       nd
                                                                      kept at 3 GBW to ensure
                                                                      suﬃcient phase-margin (see
                                                                      Chapter 5). As a result, an
                                                                      upper limit is established on
                                                                      the value of k.




                                                                     2156
                                                                     The total opamp schematic
                                                                     is shown in this slide.
                                                                        The current-starving sym-
                                                                     metrical OTA serves as a
                                                                     ﬁrst stage of a two-stage
                                                                     ampliﬁer. An output stage is
                                                                     required to reach rail-to-rail
                                                                     output swing. It is a class-
                                                                     AB ampliﬁer at the same
                                                                     time.
                                                                        It is a fairly simple
                                                                     class-AB ampliﬁer with a
                                                                     main purpose of increasing
                                                                     the Slew-Rate, without too
                                                                     much distortion.
                                                                        Node Bp is a ﬁxed biasing
point, which determines the class AB operating point. CMFB is the output of a separate CMFB
ampliﬁer, realized by switched capacitors.
  For load capacitors of 6 pF, as used in the ﬁrst integrator, the GBW is 57 MHz for only 80 mA
current consumption.
  The gain is about 50 dB, which is a lot more than 30 dB.
666                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                    2157
                                                                    The full schematic of the
                                                                    sigma-delta modulator is
                                                                    shown in this slide. The ﬁrst
                                                                    integrator takes most of the
                                                                    current as it is designed for
                                                                    6 pF sampling capacitors.
                                                                    The other two integrators
                                                                    only use 0.4 pF capacitors.
                                                                    Their power consumption is
                                                                    much lower. All common-
                                                                    mode output voltages are
                                                                    0.5 V, whereas the input
                                                                    ones are 0.2 V.
                                                                       All switches are imple-
                                                                    mented as transmission
                                                                    gates. Despite the low
supply voltage, suﬃcient V    is available for all switches. Indeed, the threshold voltages are
                           GS
about 0.3 V.
  Vertical metal-wall capacitors are used with values of 1.7 fF/mm2. No horizontal capacitors
were available.




                                                                    2158
                                                                    The output spectrum for a
                                                                    5 kHz input signal is shown
                                                                    in this slide.
                                                                       A peak SNR is reached of
                                                                    85 dB while the peak SNDR
                                                                    is 81 dB.
                                                                       The consumption is then
                                                                    130 mA (at 1 V supply volt-
                                                                    age) for the analog part
                                                                       and 10 mA for the digital
                                                                    part.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                             667

                                       2159
                                       Both the peak SNR and
                                       SNDR are shown in this
                                       slide.
                                          They reach values of 85
                                       and 81 dB respectively.
                                          The reference voltage is
                                       0.6 V.




                                       2160
                                       Other low-power sigma
                                       delta converters are dis-
                                       cussed. They again address
                                       the input switch to improve
                                       the SNDR ratio.
                                         In this one, a series resis-
                                       tor is used at the input,
                                       which replaces the input
                                       switch.
668                                                                                Chapter #21

                                                                2161
                                                                In the switched-capacitor
                                                                integrator, shown in this
                                                                slide, the input switch is
                                                                replaced by a resistor R. On
                                                                phase W1P the sampling
                                                                capacitor C is charged to
                                                                              S
                                                                the output voltage of the
                                                                ﬁrst opamp. On phase W2
                                                                the charge is then transfer-
                                                                red to integration capacitor
                                                                C.
                                                                  I
                                                                    The use of this resistor R
                                                                has several advantages. First
                                                                of all, it avoids the need to
                                                                use a switch. This switch is
                                                                diﬃcult to drive because of
                                                                the low supply voltage.
   Moreover, the linearity is quite high provided the ON-resistance of switch W1P can be
made small.
   The drawback is that an additional time constant RC comes in, which may limit the high-
                                                         S
frequency performance. This is a low-frequency solution.



                                                               2162
                                                               For low supply voltages, it
                                                               is diﬃcult to maintain the
                                                               input common-mode volt-
                                                               age constant during the
                                                               switching. In order to sup-
                                                               press     this change       in
                                                               common-mode input volt-
                                                               age, several solutions exist.
                                                                  In the top one, a capacitor
                                                               C is added, connected to
                                                                 Ls
                                                               the supply lines. It acts as a
                                                               DC level shifter, as pre-
                                                               viously described.
                                                                  In the solution at the
                                                               bottom, the input resistor R
                                                               and sampling capacitor C
                                                                                             S
are doubled, allowing the cancellation of the input common-mode voltage. This results in less
kT/C noise.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                         669

                                                                   2163
                                                                   The sigma-delta converter
                                                                   itself is a fourth-order
                                                                   MASH 2–2 converter. In
                                                                   the ﬁrst second-order loop,
                                                                   the loop ﬁlter only pro-
                                                                   cesses the quantization
                                                                   error. The signal amplitudes
                                                                   are therefore much smaller
                                                                   and much lower distortion
                                                                   levels are obtained. As a
                                                                   result, the second stage does
                                                                   not contain the signal any
                                                                   more. No additional sub-
                                                                   traction is now required in
                                                                   the coupling between both
                                                                   stages.
  It is clear from the coeﬃcients used, that the feedforward causes quantization noise only in
the feedback loop.



                                                                    2164
                                                                    The circuit implementation
                                                                    is shown in this slide.
                                                                       The switched input resis-
                                                                    tors are easily found.
                                                                    Everything is fully diﬀer-
                                                                    ential. The CMFB is applied
                                                                    through the capacitors
                                                                    CM1.
                                                                       On phase W1P the signal
                                                                    is sampled onto sampling
                                                                    capacitors C . On phase W2
                                                                                  S1
                                                                    the charge is then transfer-
                                                                    red to the integration capac-
                                                                    itors C by connecting the
                                                                            I1
                                                                    bottom plate of each capaci-
                                                                    tor to V or V (which is
                                                                              DD      SS
                                                                    ground).
670                    Chapter #21

      2165
      The measured SNDR is
      shown in this slide. The
      SNR is the same, since the
      distortion is very low up to
      the reference voltage. This
      means that both the supply
      voltage and the reference
      voltage are 0.6 V. For an
      input voltage of 0.6 V      a
                              ptp
      SNDR is obtained of 78 dB.
      This is quite impressive
      indeed.
        The maximum signal band-
      width is about 24 kHz. It
      has been realized in 0.35 mm
      CMOS and consumes only
      1 mW at 0.6 V.



      2166
      The main advantage of
      feedforward is that only
      quantization noise is pro-
      cessed by the feedback loop.
      As a result, the input swing
      can be made larger without
      distortion. This is also the
      case in the next and last
      sigma-delta modulator of
      this Chapter.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                           671

                                                                     2167
                                                                     Full feedforward means that
                                                                     the input signal is fed
                                                                     directly to the quantizer. As
                                                                     a result, the noise transfer
                                                                     function H (z) is the same as
                                                                                 e
                                                                     in a conventional topology
                                                                     but the signal transfer func-
                                                                     tion H (z) is unity. This sug-
                                                                            x
                                                                     gests that the distortion is a
                                                                     lot less in the full-feedfor-
                                                                     ward topology.
                                                                        Indeed, the signal goes
                                                                     directly to the quantizer
                                                                     without passing through the
                                                                     loop ﬁlter integrators. These
                                                                     ﬁlters only process the
quantization error, which is much smaller in amplitude than the signal itself. The distortion will
be a lot less indeed. The overload level can be higher and so is the dynamic range.


                                                                 2168
                                                                 A      4th-order    single-bit
                                                                 sigma-delta converter with
                                                                 full feedforward is shown in
                                                                 this slide. Eight gain coeﬃ-
                                                                 cients have to be deter-
                                                                 mined, which is only
                                                                 possible by optimization of
                                                                 the SNR and by equaliza-
                                                                 tion of the swings at the
                                                                 integrator outputs. This is
                                                                 achieved by means of behav-
                                                                 ioral simulation. One of the
                                                                 many possible solutions is
                                                                 indicated.
                                                                    Remember that the signal
                                                                 gain is unity and that the
loop ﬁlters only process the quantization noise. This reduces the distortion considerably, as
shown next.
672                                                                                       Chapter #21

                                                                        2169
                                                                        First of all, the gain itself
                                                                        can be relaxed from 60 to
                                                                        30 dB, which is easily
                                                                        achieved, even in nanometer
                                                                        CMOS at 1 V supply
                                                                        voltage.
                                                                           Moreover, the eﬀect of the
                                                                        distortion is much smaller.
                                                                           The gain of each opamp
                                                                        is modeled as given by
                                                                        A=A (1+a v +a v 2)
                                                                              0      1 o 2 o
                                                                        in which the a represents
                                                                                         1
                                                                        the second-order non-lin-
                                                                        earity and a the third-
                                                                                       2
                                                                        order one.
  It is shown in this slide that for equal nonlinearities in the opamps, full feedforward considerably
reduces the distortion at the output. Only a modest gain of 40 dB is used. This is not suﬃcient
for a conventional sigma-delta converter, but more than suﬃcient for the full-feedforward one.



                                                                        2170
                                                                        This is also evidenced by
                                                                        investigating the signal
                                                                        levels at the outputs of the
                                                                        four integrators.
                                                                           In a conventional topol-
                                                                        ogy the signal swings are
                                                                        high at each output node. In
                                                                        a full-feedforward topology
                                                                        the signal swings are much
                                                                        smaller as they mainly con-
                                                                        tain the quantization errors.
                                                                        The distortion generated by
                                                                        these opamps will thererfore
                                                                        be a great deal smaller.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                           673

                                                                      2171
                                                                      The opamps used in full-
                                                                      feedforward conﬁguration
                                                                      can now have less gain;
                                                                      30 dB is suﬃcient.
                                                                         The opamp schematic is
                                                                      shown in this slide.
                                                                         It is a conventional two-
                                                                      stage opamp with a tele-
                                                                      scopic cascode at the input.
                                                                      The settling time has been
                                                                      optimized. A switched-
                                                                      capacitor CMFB is used.
                                                                         The ﬁrst one reaches a
                                                                      GBW of about 200 MHz
                                                                      and consumes 4 mA at 1 V.
                                                                      The load capacitor is now
                                                                      about 3 pF.




                                                                     2172
                                                                     The circuit schematic of the
                                                                     4th-order sigma delta con-
                                                                     verter is shown in this slide.
                                                                        The four stages are clearly
                                                                     seen. All switches are imple-
                                                                     mented as transmission
                                                                     gates. Since the threshold
                                                                     voltages are only about
                                                                     0.35 V (in this 0.13 mm
                                                                     CMOS technology), there is
                                                                     no need for clock boosting
                                                                     circuitry.
                                                                        The capacitors are real-
                                                                     ized with sandwich struc-
                                                                     tures using ﬁve layers. As a
                                                                     result, the capacitance is
                                                                     0.35 fF/mm2.
  Clocked at 64 MHz, the modulator consumes 6.1 mA in the analog part and 1.3 mA in the
digital part including the output buﬀer. The reference voltage is 0.8 V, with a supply voltage of
1 V. The oversampling ratio is 64, resulting in a 0.5 MHz maximum signal bandwidth.
674                                                                                  Chapter #21

                                                                   2173
                                                                   The output spectrum shows
                                                                   the response of a 100 kHz
                                                                   sinusoidal input signal. A
                                                                   peak SNR of 86 dB has been
                                                                   obtained.
                                                                      The maximum signal ban-
                                                                   dwidth is 500 kHz.




                                                                   2174
                                                                   The maximum SNR is
                                                                   86 dB but the maximum
                                                                   SNDR is reduced to about
                                                                   75 dB. This is a result of the
                                                                   distortion generated in the
                                                                   feedforward switch, which
                                                                   has to handle the full input
                                                                   signal swing. This must be
                                                                   improved further.




2175
As a conclusion, a table is made up for comparison. A Figure of Merit is used as in Rabii (JSSC
June 97, 783–796).
  Only low-power sigma-delta converters are considered in the top list. After the name the year
of publication (in the JSSC or ISSCC) is given. The type mentions which technique is used to
arrive at 1 V supply voltage.
  SwR stands for switched-resistor, SO for switched-Opamp, LV for reduced threshold voltage,
VM for voltage multiplier.
  The supply voltage is listed, followed by the dynamic range, bandwidth and power
consumption.
L ow-power sigma-delta AD converters                                                          675

                                                                      This shows that for
                                                                   supply voltages of 1 V and
                                                                   below, Yao04, Peluso98 and
                                                                   Dessouky01 are the best.
                                                                      On the other hand, the
                                                                   lowest supply voltages have
                                                                   been reached by Ahn05
                                                                   (0.6 V) and Sauerbrey02
                                                                   (0.7 V). Quite often, this
                                                                   deals with a reduction of the
                                                                   absolute value of the thresh-
                                                                   old voltage, however.
                                                                      In the second list, a series
                                                                   of high-frequency sigma-
                                                                   delta converters are added.
                                                                   It is clear that only a few of
                                                                   them operate at 1 V supply
voltage or less. Moreover, the FOM’s are in general, higher. This illustrates that compromises
have to be taken to be able to reach a 1 V supply voltage or less.



                                                                     2176
                                                                     If only the supply voltage
                                                                     itself is taken as a measure
                                                                     for comparison, the graph in
                                                                     this slide results.
                                                                        Again, the lowest supply
                                                                     voltages have been reached
                                                                     by Ahn05 (0.6 V) and
                                                                     Sauerbrey02 (0.7 V). The
                                                                     two techniques used are also
                                                                     indicated, i.e. gate boost-
                                                                     ing and reduced threshold
                                                                     voltages.
676                    Chapter #21

      2177
      In this Chapter, an overview
      is given of the techniques
      which are available to
      reduce the supply voltage
      and the power consumption
      in sigma-delta converters.
         The main problem at low
      supply voltages is the input
      sampling switch and the
      increase of the distortion.
      This can be remedied by the
      switched-opamp technique
      and also by a number of
      clever circuit techniques.
         They have all been dis-
      cussed and compared for a
      generally accepted FOM.
