744                                                                                    Chapter #24

                                                                        These spikes are then
                                                                     injected into the substrate,
                                                                     as each output has a small
                                                                     capacitance C          to the
                                                                                    DigSub
                                                                     substrate. They have a wide
                                                                     frequency spectrum. This is
                                                                     why they are called noise.
                                                                        The second phenomenon
                                                                     is the transmission of this
                                                                     noise to the other side of the
                                                                     substrate, where the analog
                                                                     circuits are present. This
                                                                     obviously depends on the
                                                                     nature of the substrate, on
                                                                     the presence of an epitaxial
                                                                     layer, etc.
                                                                        The third phenomenon is
the pickup of this noise by the sensitive analog circuits. Each transistor also has the substrate
as an input. It converts the substrate noise into a drain current. As a result, the SNR suﬀers
badly from substrate noise. The most important speciﬁcation with this respect, is the PSSR or
Power-supply-rejection ratio.
  All analog circuits are better made fully-diﬀerential to reject the substrate noise as much as
possible. Mismatch limits this rejection however, and limits the SNR, which can be reached in
a mixed-signal circuit.



                                                                      244
                                                                      Let us concentrate ﬁrst on
                                                                      the generation of the noise
                                                                      in the substrate.
                                                                         Transmission in the sub-
                                                                      strate, or coupling to the
                                                                      analog parts through the
                                                                      substrate comes next.
                                                                         The pickup by the analog
                                                                      circuits is the ﬁnal Section.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                     745

                                                                      245
                                                                      Any digital gate causes tran-
                                                                      sitions at its output from a
                                                                      logical zero to one, or vice-
                                                                      versa. This transition causes
                                                                      a current spike from sub-
                                                                      strate to ground. As an
                                                                      example, a simple CMOS
                                                                      inverter is used. This cur-
                                                                      rent spike is then easily
                                                                      described, as shown in this
                                                                      slide.
                                                                         The size of this spike evi-
                                                                      dently depends on the sizes
                                                                      of the transistors used. Since
                                                                      thousands of digital gates
                                                                      are put together in a proces-
                                                                      sor, the total current can be
                                                                      quite large and can have a
                                                                      wide frequency spectrum.


                                                                      246
                                                                      However, analog circuits
                                                                      can also cause current
                                                                      spikes. For example, class-
                                                                      AB stages draw currents
                                                                      which are larger than their
                                                                      quiescent current.
                                                                        As an example, look at
                                                                      the class-AB input stage
                                                                      shown in this slide. For large
                                                                      input voltages, the currents
                                                                      can become quite large.
                                                                      When the current is moni-
                                                                      tored through the positive
                                                                      supply line. Large current
                                                                      spikes are visible, nearly 50
                                                                      times the quiescent current.
   Evidently, this ampliﬁer is used in a switched-capacitor ﬁlter. At each clock cycle, the opamp
is driven hard, causing these current spikes to ﬂow.
   An important compromise is now to be taken. Class AB circuits allow considerable reduction
in quiescent power consumption. On the other hand, they cause current spikes which may impair
the SNR.
746                                                                                    Chapter #24

                                                                 247
                                                                 Do all digital gates cause
                                                                 current spikes? The answer
                                                                 is negative. Current spikes
                                                                 are typical for CMOS logic.
                                                                 No current is consumed in
                                                                 either the zero output state
                                                                 or the output state. Current
                                                                 is only consumed during
                                                                 the transition. This is the
                                                                 strength of CMOS logic.
                                                                 The static power consump-
                                                                 tion is very low but
                                                                 increases with the clock
                                                                 frequency.
                                                                    Several other loc families
                                                                 exist which consume current
continuously. ECL in bipolar technology or current-mode logic in CMOS (see slide) are good
examples. As current is consumed continuously, the power consumption is high. The advantage
however, is that the current spikes are hardly visible.


                                                                     248
                                                                     Even class-A ampliﬁers can
                                                                     cause current spikes. An
                                                                     example is shown in this
                                                                     slide of a symmetrical
                                                                     class-A OTA.
                                                                        When it is used in a
                                                                     switched-capacitor    ﬁlter,
                                                                     current spikes are found at
                                                                     each clock cycle. Indeed,
                                                                     charging load capacitance
                                                                     C fast, generates a current
                                                                       L
                                                                     spike from the positive
                                                                     supply through M8 and C .
                                                                                               L
                                                                        In the same way, will
                                                                     the discharge of this load
                                                                     capacitance C cause a cur-
                                                                                   L
rent spike through M6 to ground?
  These spikes are not as large as in a class-AB circuit, they are not invisible, however.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                    747

                                                                      249
                                                                      Now that it is clear that
                                                                      both digital and analog cir-
                                                                      cuits generate plenty of cur-
                                                                      rent spikes, it has to be
                                                                      ﬁgured out how they can be
                                                                      prevented from traveling to
                                                                      the other side of the sub-
                                                                      strate, where the analog
                                                                      input stages are detecting
                                                                      whatever reaches their gates
                                                                      or substrates underneath.
                                                                         The distribution of the
                                                                      pins plays an important
                                                                      role. It is discussed ﬁrst.
                                                                         The longitudinal trans-
                                                                      mission through the sub-
strate is another important factor.
   Finally, layout techniques can be used to reduce coupling.



                                                                      2410
                                                                      A pin of a chip package is
                                                                      normally connected over a
                                                                      bonding wire to a bonding
                                                                      pad. This pad then leads to
                                                                      the active circuits by means
                                                                      of metal lines.
                                                                         Both bonding wires and
                                                                      long metal lines, on chip and
                                                                      in the package, represent
                                                                      some resistance but especi-
                                                                      ally inductance. At high fre-
                                                                      quencies (or clocks) this
                                                                      inductance can represent
                                                                      impedances of many Ohms.
                                                                      Indeed, fast clocks have
                                                                      short rise times and there-
fore generate large impedances. The voltage drop DV along this pad or line can now be
considerable.
   A bonding wire has an inductance of about 1 nH/mm. Depending on which pin is contacted,
the connection to the active circuit on the chip, can reach values up to 21 nH, for a 40-pin
plastic package. A clock current spike of 20 mA with a 2 ns rise time causes a voltage drop of
about 210 mV. Depending on the logic, values can be allowed up to 500 mV.
   This voltage drop is generated by the current to the digital circuit and appears on the supply
line of both, the digital and analog circuit block. As a result the PSRR of the analog block will
suﬀer heavily and will probably be no more than 40 dB.
748                                                                                   Chapter #24

                                                                    2411
                                                                    The bonding wires also
                                                                    cause ground bounces and
                                                                    supply line bounces. This is
                                                                    illustrated in this slide.
                                                                       A digital gate with input
                                                                    voltage v and supply volt-
                                                                              inD
                                                                    age V       is in the neighbor-
                                                                           DD,D
                                                                    hood of an analog ampliﬁer,
                                                                    this is biased at a certain
                                                                    current and has V          as a
                                                                                          DD,A
                                                                    supply voltage. The latter
                                                                    supply line has a decoupling
                                                                    capacitance C , to sup-
                                                                                      dec
                                                                    press noise and ripple.
                                                                       All connections to the
                                                                    supply lines carry bonding
wires. We monitor the output voltage of the analog ampliﬁer v       as a result of a digital input
                                                                  outA
signal v .
        inD
   The only coupling between both circuits is along the ground line, which is common to both.
   Digital transitions at the output of the digital gate, are visible at the output of the analog
ampliﬁer, as shown next.



                                                                    2412
                                                                    Digital transitions of the
                                                                    digital gate, cause ringing
                                                                    indeed at the analog output.
                                                                    The size of it depends heav-
                                                                    ily on the values of the bond
                                                                    wire inductances. The larger
                                                                    the inductances, the larger
                                                                    the ringing.
                                                                       They have to be short-
                                                                    ened, or replaced by ﬂip-
                                                                    chip bonding, as will be
                                                                    shown later.
                                                                       A more elaborate analysis
                                                                    of ground bounce is given in
                                                                    Badaroglu, JSSC July 2004,
                                                                    1119–1130.



2413
The best strategy for pinning is therefore to avoid common supply lines or common ground
lines altogether.
   The top solution is the best one. It costs one extra pin, however.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                     749

                                                                        The other two solutions
                                                                     are poor. Each pad has a
                                                                     capacitance to ground and
                                                                     has an inductor in series to
                                                                     model the bond wire.
                                                                        It is now clear that both
                                                                     solutions form a ﬁlter from
                                                                     one supply to the other. The
                                                                     middle one is better than the
                                                                     bottom one.
                                                                        In the bottom connection,
                                                                     the pin itself and all external
                                                                     decoupling capacitors con-
                                                                     nected to that pin, are iso-
                                                                     lated from the supply lines
                                                                     because of the bonding-wire
                                                                     inductance. This is clearly
                                                                     the worst possible solution.


                                                                    2414
                                                                    The bonding wires again
                                                                    play an important role in
                                                                    this sensor preampliﬁer fol-
                                                                    lowed by a DSP block. Both
                                                                    the input and output are
                                                                    actually analog. The core is
                                                                    a DSP block preceded by a
                                                                    ADC and followed by a
                                                                    DAC. All this is on-chip,
                                                                    whereas the sensor itself and
                                                                    the output are oﬀ-chip.
                                                                       How to connect the
                                                                    supply lines and ground?
                                                                       The substrate is separated
                                                                    from the analog ground,
                                                                    which is reserved for the
input and output ampliﬁers on-chip only and to the ground of the sensor oﬀ-chip.
  The substrate is taken out separately and connected externally to the supply ground line.
Many parallel bonding-wires are used in parallel as this ground connection is common to both
the analog circuits and digital blocks. Two separate pins are used however, for these ground
connections VSSA and VSSD.
  The supply voltages also come in over two separate pins VDDA and VDDD. Again, multiple
bonding wires are used for the digital supply pin.
  All necessary precautions have now been taken to avoid coupling. The most sensitive point
for coupling is at the analog ground of the input ampliﬁer. As no diﬀerential sensor is used, this
point will pick up noise from the substrate and from the external PCB ground. Diﬀerential
sensors are therefore always preferred.
750                                                                                    Chapter #24

                                                                   2415
                                                                   It is not always easy to
                                                                   model the coupling between
                                                                   the analog and digital
                                                                   blocks. A network of resis-
                                                                   tors and capacitors can be
                                                                   used, as shown in this slide.
                                                                   However it is a non-trivial
                                                                   task to obtain realistic
                                                                   values of all these com-
                                                                   ponents.
                                                                      Both the analog and the
                                                                   digital blocks are coupled
                                                                   by means of capacitors to a
                                                                   common substrate, which
                                                                   can be modeled as a grid of
                                                                   resistors and capacitors.
Both the analog and the digital blocks have separate pins for supply lines and ground. They all
consist of inductors in series with small resistors.
  The external supply line and ground are on top and at the bottom.
  This applies to analog and digital blocks which are suﬃciently small such that they do not
have to be subdivided over more blocks. If this is the case, then the simulation time grows
considerably.



                                                                    2416
                                                                    In this example, we try to
                                                                    ﬁnd out what is a reasonable
                                                                    number of pins.
                                                                       The maximum number of
                                                                    pins is nine. This is evidently
                                                                    rarely acceptable. Some of
                                                                    the pins can be combined to
                                                                    reduce this number, as
                                                                    explained now.
                                                                       The nine pins can be
                                                                    divided into four for the
                                                                    analog part, four for the dig-
                                                                    ital part and one for the
                                                                    screen in the middle. This
                                                                    screen is a metal plate with
                                                                    a certain width to physically
separate the analog blocks from the digital ones as far as necessary. It should also go as deep
as possible. It is therefore connected to an underlying deep diﬀusion.
  The four pins of the analog part are the following:
– the positive supply line
– the ground line
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                  751

– the substrate (bulk)
– the guard rings.
Occasionally, the substrate can be connected to one of the supply lines (positive supply or
ground). This is not always advisable however, as will be shown later.
  The guard rings are diﬀusions surrounding the most sensitive analog ampliﬁers. They are
meant to take up noise coming laterally from the digital parts. Of course, they do not pick up
a great deal of noise arriving vertically. This will also be discussed later in more detail.
  Digital blocks can also have four pins, although in practice only two of them are used, the
positive supply line and ground.

                                                                    2417
                                                                    These    conclusions are
                                                                    repeated, together with
                                                                    some useful suggestions
                                                                    about the layout.
                                                                       They speak for them-
                                                                    selves.




                                                                   2418
                                                                   Another way to summarize
                                                                   the techniques to reduce
                                                                   noise pick up is given in
                                                                   this slide.
                                                                      Some eﬀort is also being
                                                                   made to reduce the genera-
                                                                   tion of noise. The spreading
                                                                   of the digital activity may
                                                                   help to reduce the spec-
                                                                   tral content of the noise
                                                                   generated.
                                                                      On the analog (receiver)
                                                                   side we notice that buried
                                                                   layers are suggested to
                                                                   screen the transistors from
                                                                   the noise coming in verti-
                                                                   cally. This is a very eﬀective
technique, indeed. On the other hand, buried layers are not always available.
752                                                                                   Chapter #24

  Quite often, considerable space is allotted to decoupling capacitances. These are small capaci-
tances connected locally to provide low impedances to ground at high frequencies.



                                                                2419
                                                                Actually, the same tech-
                                                                niques to avoid coupling
                                                                of noise is applicable
                                                                for printed-circuit boards
                                                                (PCB) as for silicon chips.
                                                                   This is why an example is
                                                                given of a printed-circuit
                                                                board with an analog block
                                                                and a digital block. It is to
                                                                be connected to several
                                                                pieces of equipment.
                                                                   It is clear that all sup-
                                                                ply lines are separated.
                                                                Moreover, the shielding of
                                                                all connecting cables is con-
                                                                nected to the external
ground separately. The substrate or the ground plane of the PCB is also connected separately
to the external ground.



                                                                    2420
                                                                    On-chip decoupling may
                                                                    not always work.
                                                                       An example is given in
                                                                    this slide where decoupling
                                                                    does more harm than good.
                                                                       A single digital gate is
                                                                    used. It is switched by appli-
                                                                    cation of a logic one. It is
                                                                    loaded by a load capacitor.
                                                                    Its supply lines are con-
                                                                    nected over bonding wire
                                                                    inductors. The supply volt-
                                                                    age is measured at the termi-
                                                                    nals of the gate.
                                                                       Without decoupling cap-
                                                                    acitance,      high-frequency
ringing is detected on the supply line. The addition of a decoupling capacitance C across the
                                                                                      D
gate terminals, causes ringing of this capacitor with the bonding wire inductors. It has a lower
frequency than before, but is larger in amplitude.
   Addition of series resistors R dampens this ringing but also causes a DC voltage drop along
                                 L
the supply lines, which is to be avoided.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                        753

                                                                       2421
                                                                       A better solution is to add a
                                                                       series resonant RLC circuit
                                                                       across      the     decoupling
                                                                       capacitor C .
                                                                                     D
                                                                          A series resonant RLC
                                                                       circuit provides a null in the
                                                                       impedance (see Chapter 22)
                                                                       at its resonant frequency f .
                                                                                                     r
                                                                       It is therefore an ideal circuit
                                                                       to dampen oscillation at this
                                                                       frequency.
                                                                          If its resonant frequency
                                                                       can be tuned at the ringing
                                                                       frequency of the decoupling
                                                                       capacitor with the bonding
                                                                       wire inductors, then the
damping will stop the ringing.
   If this ringing occurs at the clock frequency, then it is fairly easy to tune this series RLC
circuit to this clock frequency. It is not as critical as it sounds. Some typical values are given in
this slide.

                                                                       2422
                                                                       Now that we have a better
                                                                       view on how to cope with
                                                                       the bonding wire inductors,
                                                                       let us see how the substrate
                                                                       itself plays a role.
                                                                          It is clear that the sub-
                                                                       strate is most responsible for
                                                                       the transmission of the noise
                                                                       from the digital part to the
                                                                       analog part.




2423
Several possible substrates are shown in this slide.
  The top one has an epitaxial layer, whereas the other one has not.
  The epitaxial layer is usually doped fairly low (with high resistivity) so as to set the MOST
characteristics. The substrate however, is highly doped (with low resistivity) to allow current
ﬂow with low voltage drops. As a consequence, the current reaches the p+ diﬀusion from the
Injector to the Receiver in a vertical direction. Also, as the substrate has low resistivity, the
754                                                                                      Chapter #24

                                                                       distance between Injector
                                                                       and Receiver does not
                                                                       matter.
                                                                         One of the questions is,
                                                                       how close can the Injector
                                                                       be to the Drain before hori-
                                                                       zontal current ﬂows in the
                                                                       epitaxial layer? The answer
                                                                       is that if the distance
                                                                       between both diﬀusions is
                                                                       smaller than about 4 times
                                                                       the thickness of the epitaxial
                                                                       layer, then horizontal cur-
                                                                       rent can also be expected in
                                                                       the epitaxial layer.
                                                                         This is the case if no epi-
                                                                       taxial layer is present. The
whole substrate is now lowly doped. As a consequence, the current from the left p+ island (the
Injector) spreads into the substrate to be collected again at the right p+ island, or the Receiver.
Both horizontal and vertical currents are then present around the p+ island.
  In this case, the distance will play a role: the larger the distance, the larger the resistance
between both islands.



                                                                       2424
                                                                       In this experiment, the
                                                                       inﬂuence of the distance
                                                                       between the Injector (at the
                                                                       right) and the Receiver (at
                                                                       the left) is investigated in
                                                                       more detail.
                                                                          A short current pulse is
                                                                       injected at a n+ island. This
                                                                       is expected to cause a cur-
                                                                       rent to both p+ grounds,
                                                                       the digital ground at the
                                                                       right, and the analog ground
                                                                       at the far left. A nMOST
                                                                       transistor is added at the
                                                                       left. It is biased as a source
                                                                       follower with a 50 V Source
resistor, at which node the output voltage is measured.
  The left p+ island is connected to the analog ground, but is actually the substrate contact for
the analog part, which is here the nMOST Source follower. The lateral resistor between this
substrate contact and the Source of the nMOST is denoted by r . It must be made smaller in size.
                                                                1
  In a similar way, the lateral resistor between the digital injector and its substrate contact is
denoted by r . It must also be made smaller.
              2
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                       755

  The lateral distance between the analog nMOST and the digital injector is denoted by resistor
R. The larger this R is the better.
  Indeed the Voltage V sensed at the Source of the nMOST Source follower, as a result of
                         out
the input current I , is as given in this slide. This current ﬂows mainly to its digital ground and
                   in
causes a voltage r I , in the epitaxial layer, underneath the digital p+ island. This voltage is
                   2 in
then sensed at the output through a potentiometric divider of R and r .
                                                                         1




                                                                      2425
                                                                      The output voltage V          is
                                                                                                out
                                                                      given in this slide, versus dis-
                                                                      tance between Injector and
                                                                      Receiver.
                                                                         On a lightly doped sub-
                                                                      strate, without epitaxial
                                                                      layer, the currents ﬂows
                                                                      through a large resistance.
                                                                      As a result, the output volt-
                                                                      age is large and inversely
                                                                      proportional to the distance.
                                                                         When a lightly doped epi-
                                                                      taxial layer is added on top,
                                                                      the result is the same.
                                                                      Indeed, the current still
                                                                      encounters a large resis-
tance, which is proportional to the distance.
   Only when a heavily-doped substrate is used, all the current ﬂows directly to the substrate
and along the substrate to the other island. The distance is no longer of any importance.
Moreover, the output voltage is small because the substrate resistance is small.
   Only when the distance between both islands is smaller than 3–4 times the epitaxial thickness,
some current now ﬂows through the epitaxial layer. The resistance is higher and so is the
output voltage.
   A designer must be aware of the kind of substrate that is being used in this particular CMOS
technology.




2426
If no epitaxial layer is present, the extension of the distance is now about the only remedy left
to reduce coupling.
   This is not quite true. The third dimension can be used as well.
   An example is given in this slide. Between the injector (on the right) and the receiver, a deep
diﬀusion is added (such as the n-well), connected to the supply voltage. As a result, a wide
depletion region is added.
756                     Chapter #24

         This n-well diﬀusion with
      its depletion region acts as
      an isolator between Injector
      and Receiver.
         In this way, the current
      path from Injector to
      Receiver is made longer, the
      resistance larger and the
      coupling weaker.




      2427
      Remember that all these
      contacts need separate pins.
         As an example, a supply
      line (or ground line) of a dig-
      ital block which runs in par-
      allel with a supply line (or
      ground line) of analog
      block, and gives capacitive
      coupling.
         A deep diﬀusion with
      metal on top between both
      reduces signiﬁcantly the
      coupling. Even better, is to
      lead the three bonding wires
      to diﬀerent pins.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                       757

                                                                     2428
                                                                     Deeper isolation is obtained
                                                                     by deep trench isolation
                                                                     between      Injector      and
                                                                     Receiver.
                                                                        In the example in this
                                                                     slide, a deep trench is etched
                                                                     between the areas on the left
                                                                     and the right. Moreover,
                                                                     both areas have a buried
                                                                     layer, which are ideal to
                                                                     screen away currents com-
                                                                     ing in vertically.
                                                                        The right n-well houses
                                                                     pMOST devices, whereas
                                                                     the area on the left houses
                                                                     nMOST devices. The isola-
tion between both is quasi perfect as it cuts through most of the silicon.
   Taking two diﬀerent chips is even more perfect, but requires more expensive packaging.


                                                                      2429
                                                                      Guard rings are ideal to
                                                                      screen away currents com-
                                                                      ing in horizontally. This is
                                                                      illustrated in this slide.
                                                                         Guard rings are highly-
                                                                      doped       diﬀusion       rings
                                                                      around a sensitive transistor
                                                                      or ampliﬁer stage, with the
                                                                      same doping as the under-
                                                                      lying material. In a p− epi-
                                                                      taxial layer, they are shallow
                                                                      p+ diﬀusions, as shown in
                                                                      this slide.
                                                                         Their purpose is to pick
                                                                      up the current which comes
                                                                      in horizontally along the
epitaxial layer and along the surface and to lead it outside.
   The substrate contact (on the right) is normally separate. Moreover it is better connected to
a separate pin as well, as shown on top.
   If the substrate contact and guard ring contact are connected together, to save a pin, as shown
at the bottom, the current from the substrate contact can re-enter the silicon through the guard-
ring contact and reach the transistor. This is better to be avoided.
758                                                                                       Chapter #24

                                                                        2430
                                                                        Horizontal coupling be-
                                                                        tween two parallel lines is
                                                                        purely capacitive. However,
                                                                        this is only true for non-con-
                                                                        ductive substrates.
                                                                          The coupling is shown
                                                                        between two parallel con-
                                                                        ductors at some distance,
                                                                        such that the isolation is
                                                                        about 60 dB at 1 GHz. It is
                                                                        purely capacitive. It evi-
                                                                        dently decreases at 20 dB/
                                                                        decade. This is only true for
                                                                        perfectly isolating SOI
                                                                        substrates.
                                                                          Actually, this capacitance
can be calculated, as shown in this slide for two areas A, a distance apart D, which is much
larger than the dimension of area A. It is assumed that the dielectric is pure silicon oxide.
   These curves also show that the isolation becomes more resistive the higher the
doping level is. For partially doped SOI (around 20 Vcm), the coupling is resistive between
200 MHz and 10 GHz. The same applies to bulk silicon with the same low resistivity (20 Vcm).
Taking SOI does not pay oﬀ in this frequency region!
   Bulk silicon is a lot worse. For frequencies higher than 100 MHz, it provides very little
isolation. The coupling is resistive. It can be modeled with resistors as done before.
   At very low frequencies, the isolation can be very large. It is now mainly limited by the leakage
currents of the reverse biased diodes (Drain-bulk, etc. ...).


                                                                        2431
                                                                        Now that we know what
                                                                        isolation to expect in the
                                                                        substrate, let us see how
                                                                        transmission in the sub-
                                                                        strate can be modeled and
                                                                        what layout rules can be
                                                                        extracted. This is mainly
                                                                        based on simulations of
                                                                        larger substrates with noise
                                                                        sources and sensitive pre-
                                                                        ampliﬁers combined. Some-
                                                                        times experimental data is
                                                                        available as well, however.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                       759

                                                                        2432
                                                                        Experimental      work      to
                                                                        model all substrate resist-
                                                                        ances and capacitances is a
                                                                        tedious job. It is the only
                                                                        way however, to obtain real-
                                                                        istic results with simula-
                                                                        tions. In this way, the eﬀect
                                                                        of bond wire inductances
                                                                        can be evaluated. An exam-
                                                                        ple is given in this slide.
                                                                           A cross-section is given of
                                                                        a CMOS inverter in n-well
                                                                        CMOS. Actually, this is
                                                                        twin-well CMOS as an addi-
                                                                        tional p-well is provided in
                                                                        the p-substrate for the
nMOSTs. Both cases are considered, i.e. a highly doped substrate which can be regarded as a
equipotential plane, and a lowly-doped substrate, which has to be modeled by horizontal resistors
or impedances.
   The nMOST in the p-well has a p+ substrate contact, connected with the Source to ground
over a bonding wire L . There is a horizontal resistor (or impedance) between the channel area
                         b
of the nMOST and its substrate contact. There are also two resistors (or impedances) connecting
the channel area and the contact area to the substrate.
   Similarly, for the pMOST, a horizontal resistor (or impedance) must be included between the
channel area and the substrate contact. Moreover, two separate capacitors are required to model
the depletion region of the n-well on the p-substrate. One additional horizontal resistor (or
impedance) is required to model the area between both transistors.
   All these resistors (or impedances) are distributed resistors and are therefore not easy to model.


                                                                        2433
                                                                        In order to measure the sub-
                                                                        strate noise, a wide-band
                                                                        ampliﬁer is required, as
                                                                        shown in this slide.
                                                                           It is a single diﬀerential
                                                                        pair with output Source fol-
                                                                        lowers. The CMRR is some-
                                                                        what limited by uneven
                                                                        substrate impedances. How-
                                                                        ever, it does provide a GBW
                                                                        of 500 MHz.
                                                                           The diﬀerence is mea-
                                                                        sured between the external
                                                                        ground and the substrate.
                                                                        Both are capacitively cou-
                                                                        pled. The output voltage
760                                                                                    Chapter #24

includes all noise picked up from the substrate after redistribution by all horizontal and vertical
impedances, as discussed previously.


                                                                      2434
                                                                      The output voltage is shown
                                                                      in this slide.
                                                                         The noise is generated by
                                                                      a ring oscillator, which can
                                                                      be switched on and oﬀ.
                                                                      Its frequency is about
                                                                      800 MHz.
                                                                         It is clear that this fre-
                                                                      quency is clearly visible at
                                                                      the substrate of the analog
                                                                      MOSTs. It can now be
                                                                      regarded as an input signal
                                                                      at the back gate of the
                                                                      MOSTs.
                                                                         Moreover, it also shows
                                                                      that the horizontal and ver-
tical resistors (or impedances) can be modeled fairly well. The measurement results do not deviate
a signiﬁcant amount from the SPICE results.
   In conclusion, the modeling of the distributed horizontal and vertical impedances is a necessity
to be able to predict coupling by means of simulation.


                                                                     2435
                                                                     From the same data, the
                                                                     inﬂuence of the bonding
                                                                     wires can be extracted in
                                                                     great detail.
                                                                       The noise is generated in
                                                                     the substrate and reaches
                                                                     the analog CMOS inverter
                                                                     through substrate coupling.
                                                                       If bonding wires are used
                                                                     with large inductances, then
                                                                     the noise currents cannot
                                                                     escape from the substrate
                                                                     contacts. As a consequence,
                                                                     the noise levels in the
                                                                     substrate underneath the
                                                                     analog circuits are high.
  This is illustrated in this slide. It shows the voltage obtained on the substrate, versus bond
wire inductance. Very low inductance can only be obtained with ﬂip-chip bonding. In this case
the supply line and ground contacts carry zero resistance. What is left is due to direct coupling
to the Sources and Drains of the MOSTs.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                     761

  The cross-over point seems to be around 0.1 nH which corresponds to about 0.1 mm bonding
wire. This is very short indeed, and not practical.


                                                                      2436
                                                                      In the previous example,
                                                                      a 7-stage ring oscillator
                                                                      is used as a noise source
                                                                      and only a single-CMOS
                                                                      inverter-ampliﬁer as receiver.
                                                                      This has been extended to a
                                                                      220-Kgates telecom chip as
                                                                      a noise source and a WLAN
                                                                      modem as receiver. The
                                                                      bonding wires are 6 nH.
                                                                         Both the peak-to-peak
                                                                      and the RMS noise are
                                                                      shown (on the left). The
                                                                      largest peak around 75
                                                                      MHz can also be found by
                                                                      simulation. Accurate values
have been introduced for all parasitic resistances and capacitances.
  There is a fairly linear relation between the noise and the supply voltage. This is a result of
the increased current injection in the substrate, which increases linearly with the supply voltage.
  It is also found that as a great deal of noise is generated by the Input/Output buﬀers as by
the digital gates themselves!


                                                                    2437
                                                                    Another example of a sub-
                                                                    strate model to carry out
                                                                    simulations of the noise cou-
                                                                    pling in more complex cir-
                                                                    cuitry is shown in this slide.
                                                                       A digital CMOS inverter
                                                                    is shown together with its
                                                                    substrate contacts. It causes
                                                                    the injection of a number of
                                                                    currents into the substrate.
                                                                    The substrate itself is mod-
                                                                    eled as a mesh of resistors.
                                                                       The noise currents have
                                                                    various origins, such as
                                                                    noise from the switching
                                                                    transients on the supply
lines and noise from the switching on the output Drains. These noise currents are modeled as
separate independent input current sources, in parallel with either resistors (if no junctions are
involved) or capacitors (in the case of junctions).
762                                                                                       Chapter #24

  Long simulations are required to discover which are the nodes in the circuit with higher noise
coupling and with lower noise coupling.
  Examples of the results are shown next.

                                                                     2438
                                                                     It is obvious that the simula-
                                                                     tion times heavily depend
                                                                     on the resolution of the
                                                                     mesh. The simulation time
                                                                     increases with a higher
                                                                     order of the number of
                                                                     nodes. Only partial circuits
                                                                     can therefore be handled,
                                                                     depending on the computer
                                                                     used.
                                                                        Examples are given of iso-
                                                                     noise curves (or contours)
                                                                     obtained for an ampliﬁer
                                                                     surrounded by three noise
                                                                     sources     (bottom       left).
                                                                     Clearly, these noise sources
cause a great deal of noise, even in the middle where the ampliﬁer is positioned (point A). When
a guard ring is added however (bottom right), the noise contours are compressed closer to the
noise sources, leaving the center (point A) nearly noiseless.
  If, on the other hand, all noise sources are on top and on the right (top right) the noise
contours are clearly asymmetrical.
  Such simulations show that it is possible to obtain quantitative data about noise coupling.
However, depending on the computer power available, such simulations will always be limited
to partial circuits.

                                                                       2439
                                                                       If everything fails, if a lot of
                                                                       noise is generated by the
                                                                       digital or class-AB circuits
                                                                       and if the substrates under
                                                                       digital and analog are not
                                                                       isolated at all, then we can
                                                                       still try to make the analog
                                                                       circuits insensitive to the
                                                                       substrate and power supply
                                                                       noise.
                                                                          This speciﬁcation is called
                                                                       the power-supply rejection
                                                                       ratio (PSRR). We will see
                                                                       that the PSRR is never as
                                                                       good       for   single-ended
                                                                       ampliﬁers. The conclusion is
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                    763

that all mixed-signal circuits must be made full-diﬀerential. As a result, the power consumption
increases drastically (more than doubles!).
  For full-diﬀerential circuitry, the limit is now reached by mismatch. This is also the case for
CMRR. Actually, what the PSRR is for the rejection of power-supply-line noise is the CMRR
for the rejection of ground noise.
  Its deﬁnition is therefore easily established.




                                                                     2440
                                                                     This Bode diagram shows
                                                                     the gain A of an ampliﬁer
                                                                                v
                                                                     for a diﬀerential input. It is
                                                                     high at low frequencies (A )
                                                                                                v0
                                                                     but decreases with a slope of
                                                                     −20 dB/decade until the
                                                                     GBW is reached.
                                                                        The gain A        of this
                                                                                      DD
                                                                     ampliﬁer is also shown with
                                                                     the positive power supply
                                                                     v as an input. It is rather
                                                                      DD
                                                                     low at low frequencies
                                                                     (A ) but does not change
                                                                        DD0
                                                                     all that much at high fre-
                                                                     quencies. The reason is that
                                                                     at high frequencies, capaci-
tive coupling prevents the output voltage to become really small. The output becomes constant
as a result of a ratio of some capacitors, usually the load capacitor C and some parasitic
                                                                            L
coupling capacitor C . If C is 2 pF and C is 0.1 pF, the ratio is now 20 or 26 dB.
                      n     L               n
   The PSRR is now deﬁned as the ratio of the gain A to the diﬀerential input to the gain A
                                                       v                                        DD
of the supply voltage. It is high at low frequencies and low at high frequencies. At the GBW
however, the gain A is unity. At this frequency, the PSRR equals the inverse of the gain A .
                     v                                                                         DD
It is an excellent measure of the PSRR at high frequencies.
   For the example in this slide, the PSRR is 26 dB at the GBW.
   At this frequency, the PSRR is rather small, because it is a ratio of two capacitors, the load
capacitor and some parasitic coupling capacitor.




2441
What components play an important role in PSRR?
   An example is given in this slide of a current ampliﬁer. The impedance at the Gates of
transistors M1 and M2 is low. Does this mean that the PSRR is large at high frequencies?
   At low frequencies, all capacitances can be left out. In this case, output resistor r determines
                                                                                        o
the current to the current mirror. The output current is therefore small.
   At high frequencies, the parasitic coupling capacitance C takes over the role of r . The current
                                                             p                        o
to the current mirror now increases with frequency and so does the output current. The gain of
764                                                                                     Chapter #24

                                                                      the current mirror is con-
                                                                      stant up to a frequency
                                                                      g /2pC or f . This is evi-
                                                                        m     GS     T
                                                                      dently higher than all fre-
                                                                      quencies of interest.
                                                                         Note that capacitance C
                                                                                                    p
                                                                      is a coupling capacitor
                                                                      between the positive supply
                                                                      line and the output of the
                                                                      input transistor. It is usually
                                                                      a lot larger than the output
                                                                      capacitor of the transistor
                                                                      only.




                                                                      2442
                                                                      Let us now have a look at
                                                                      the PSRR       of a simple
                                                                                 DD
                                                                      OTA, as shown in this slide.
                                                                         A detailed analysis has
                                                                      shown that the most impor-
                                                                      tant components are r and
                                                                                            o1
                                                                      r . Indeed, the current
                                                                       o5
                                                                      caused by a small signal on
                                                                      the positive supply voltage
                                                                      v     ﬂows through M4,
                                                                        DD
                                                                      through resistor r       and
                                                                                          o1
                                                                      through M2 to the output.
                                                                      The current through r
                                                                                                 o5
                                                                      reaches the output directly.
                                                                         The PSRR of this gain
                                                                                   DD
                                                                      block is now the ratio of
both gains given in this slide. It has a very similar expression as the small-signal voltage gain.
It is also large at low frequencies as it includes the g r products of the transistors in the
                                                          m o
signal path.
   It will be reduced at higher frequencies.

2443
The PSRR at higher frequency is of much higher importance as digital blocks on chips are
            DD
more likely going to work at high clock frequencies. These are the frequencies which are expected
to be rejected by the analog circuits.
  At high frequencies, the coupling is mainly carried out by the capacitors C and C           . The
                                                                                n4       n5DD
ﬁrst one C is a capacitance from node 4 to ground. Capacitor C         is the coupling capacitance
           n4                                                     n5DD
between node 5 (at the output) and the V supply line. Again, this capacitance can be a great
                                           DD
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                        765

                                                                      deal larger than the output
                                                                      capacitor C of transistor
                                                                                     DS
                                                                      M5. It is made up by the
                                                                      coupling between the V
                                                                                                    DD
                                                                      supply line and the output
                                                                      line of the ampliﬁer.
                                                                         For the PSRR at high
                                                                                           DD
                                                                      frequencies the g comes in
                                                                                          m1
                                                                      of the input devices. At the
                                                                      GBW however, the g             is
                                                                                                 m1
                                                                      substituted by C , as shown
                                                                                          L
                                                                      in this slide.
                                                                         As expected, this PSRR
                                                                                                    DD
                                                                      at the GBW is not very
                                                                      large, as it is a ratio of small
                                                                      capacitances. For a fre-
                                                                      quency at 1/10th of the
GBW, the PSRR is 20 dB larger, etc.
               DD
 Note that the PSRR can only be high if both the capacitances C and C      are small.
                   DD                                          n4     n5DD



                                                                      2444
                                                                      The PSRR with respect to
                                                                                  SS
                                                                      the other supply voltage is
                                                                      signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
                                                                         It is caused by the cou-
                                                                      pling capacitor C      at the
                                                                                        n3DD
                                                                      common-Source point. For
                                                                      perfect matching of the tran-
                                                                      sistor pair M1,2 and M4,5
                                                                      none of this current can ﬂow
                                                                      through the output load C .
                                                                                                 L
                                                                         Mismatch between, for
                                                                      example, transistors M1 and
                                                                      M2, will cause some of this
                                                                      current to ﬂow through the
                                                                      output load, however.
                                                                         The PSRR will be a
                                                                                     SS
ratio of capacitors, multiplied by a matching factor. It will be a lot larger than the PSRR of
                                                                                              DD
the positive supply line.
  On the other hand, this coupling capacitance can be quite large as the capacitance C
                                                                                                well
between the p-well and the substrate has to be added. Both input devices are in this p-well. Its
area is therefore quite large and so is the capacitor C .
                                                       well
  Note that nowadays mainly n-well CMOS technologies are used. The structure is then inverted
– the input devices are then pMOSTs.
766                                                                                    Chapter #24

                                                                    2445
                                                                    The situation is somewhat
                                                                    more complicated in a two-
                                                                    stage Miller OTA.
                                                                       After all, when the input
                                                                    signal is applied at the posi-
                                                                    tive supply voltage, it is not
                                                                    clear whether the current
                                                                    through the ﬁrst stage is
                                                                    added or subtracted from
                                                                    the current through the
                                                                    second stage.
                                                                       A thorough calculation at
                                                                    low frequencies shows that
                                                                    the current through
                                                                       output resistor r of the
                                                                                         o7
                                                                    current source transistor
M7 of the ﬁrst stage is the dominant one. This current can only provide a contribution to the
output voltage of the ﬁrst stage provided there is some mismatch in the ﬁrst stage, as previously
explained.
  At low frequencies, the PSRR is then readily found. It can be fairly large as it contains
                                  DD
two factors.



                                                                     2446
                                                                     At high frequencies, the situ-
                                                                     ation is very diﬀerent.
                                                                         First of all, capacitances
                                                                     take over but also resistor
                                                                     r remains in the expres-
                                                                       o5
                                                                     sions. Calculations show
                                                                     that the PSRR          at the
                                                                                        DD
                                                                     GBW now contains three
                                                                     terms.
                                                                         Two of them are simply
                                                                     related to the two dominant
                                                                     coupling capacitors. For the
                                                                     ﬁrst C       it is easy to see
                                                                             n3DD
                                                                     that this performs exactly
                                                                     the same role as resistor r .
                                                                                                 o7
                                                                     The mismatch in the ﬁrst
stage comes in. Also, C     can be quite large as it includes the well to substrate capacitance of
                        n3DD
the input transistors.
   Capacitor C      is the direct coupling capacitance between the supply line and the output.
               n4DD
   The ﬁrst term g /g is somewhat harder to understand. It is actually the resistive divider
                   o5 m6
from the supply line to the output, made up by r and the resistance 1/g oﬀered by M6 at
                                                    o5                      m6
high frequencies.
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                       767

  It is impossible to predict which one of the three terms is dominant. It is probably the ﬁrst or
the second one as they only have one single factor involved. The last one has two factors.



                                                                    2447
                                                                    The PSRR from the nega-
                                                                                SS
                                                                    tive supply does not involve
                                                                    matching. Indeed at low fre-
                                                                    quencies, it is a result of cur-
                                                                    rents through resistors r
                                                                                                  o1
                                                                    and r .
                                                                          o4
                                                                       The current through resis-
                                                                    tor r ﬂows through M3
                                                                          o1
                                                                    (and the input devices M1
                                                                    and M2). It is therefore mir-
                                                                    rored to M4 and injected as
                                                                    a current on node 1. From
                                                                    here it is ampliﬁed to the
                                                                    output in the same way as
                                                                    the signal current from the
                                                                    input transistors M1 and
                                                                    M2.
  The current through r        is also injected as a current on node 1. It is now added to the
                        o4
previous current.



                                                                       2448
                                                                       At high frequencies, the situ-
                                                                       ation is again somewhat
                                                                       more complicated.
                                                                          The dominant capaci-
                                                                       tances are added in the cir-
                                                                       cuit schematic. They are the
                                                                       coupling capacitors between
                                                                       the supply line and node 1,
                                                                       the output of the input
                                                                       stage.
                                                                          Calculation    of       the
                                                                       PSRR       shows however,
                                                                              SS
                                                                       that this capacitor is not
                                                                       that important. The PSRR
                                                                                                    SS
                                                                       is zero dB anyway. This
                                                                       means that any signal at the
negative supply reaches the output terminal unattenuated.
  This clearly proves that single-ended opamps cannot be used for mixed-signal analog
processing.
  What is the origin of this 0 dB?
768                                                                                   Chapter #24

   At high frequencies, transistor M6 behaves as a small resistance with value 1/g . As a result
                                                                                   m6
the negative line is nearly shorted to the output line. The attenuation from supply line to output
is therefore zero.




                                                                     2449
                                                                     One way to improve the
                                                                     PSRR is to a make com-
                                                                            SS
                                                                     pensation capacitor C uni-
                                                                                            c
                                                                     directional. After all, it is
                                                                     this capacitor C which
                                                                                         c
                                                                     turns transistor M6 into a
                                                                     resistor.
                                                                       The addition of a cascode,
                                                                     used very much to get rid
                                                                     of the positive zero (see
                                                                     Chapter 5), increases the
                                                                     PSRR      from zero to a
                                                                            SS
                                                                     capacitance ratio, as for the
                                                                     other ampliﬁers. Values of
                                                                     the order of 20 dB (at the
                                                                     GBW) can now be expected.
                                                                       The actual calculation is
                                                                     shown next.




                                                             2450
                                                             A simpliﬁed schematic is
                                                             shown in this slide, and an
                                                             even more simpliﬁed one to
                                                             the right.
                                                                Calculation of the gain
                                                             from the negative supply
                                                             line V to the output shows
                                                                    SS
                                                             that the parasitic capaci-
                                                             tance at the input node of
                                                             transistor M6 now plays a
                                                             dominant role.
                                                                Its ratio to the compensa-
                                                             tion capacitor C determines
                                                                               c
                                                             the PSRR . For this reason,
                                                                         SS
                                                             we may want to make C
                                                                                         c
                                                             larger. Remember, however,
that the value of C determines the GBW, the stability and the integrated noise. So many
                   c
compromises have already come together in C !
                                           c
Coupling eVects in mixed analog-digital ICs                                                    769

                                                                    2451
                                                                    Another two-stage Miller
                                                                    ampliﬁer is shown in this
                                                                    slide. It uses a symmetrical
                                                                    OTA as a ﬁrst stage.
                                                                    Cascodes are used as well. It
                                                                    is therefore evident that the
                                                                    compensation capacitor is
                                                                    led through a cascode,
                                                                    which is here M10.
                                                                       As a result the PSRR is
                                                                                              SS
                                                                    enhanced as well.
                                                                       The actual expression is
                                                                    shown in this slide.
                                                                       It is a ratio of capacitors
                                                                    involving a large number of
                                                                    parasitic capacitances. It
                                                                    will be larger than 0 dB, but
                                                                    not signiﬁcantly!


                                                                    2452
                                                                    The PSRR for a symmetri-
                                                                                 SS
                                                                    cal OTA by itself is shown
                                                                    in this slide. It is mainly
                                                                    determined by mismatches.
                                                                       At low frequencies it is
                                                                    determined by the resistance
                                                                    at node 5.
                                                                       At high frequencies (at
                                                                    GBW) however, it is deter-
                                                                    mined by the diﬀerence in
                                                                    coupling capacitance from
                                                                    the supply line to the nodes
                                                                    4 and 5. Because node 4 is
                                                                    the output node and node 5
                                                                    is not, the coupling capaci-
                                                                    tor C      is likely to be much
                                                                          n4SS
larger than the one on the other side C        .
                                          n5SS
   As a result, the simplest expression of the PSRR is the ratio of C to this coupling capacitor
                                                   SS                L
C      . Again, values of 20 dB can be expected.
  n4SS
770                                                                                    Chapter #24

                                                                      2453
                                                                      Experimental evidence on
                                                                      PSRR is not easily found.
                                                                      One example is shown in
                                                                      this slide.
                                                                        The PSRR has been mea-
                                                                      sured for both a single-
                                                                      ended as for a fully-
                                                                      diﬀerential switched-capaci-
                                                                      tor ampliﬁer. They act as a
                                                                      receiver.
                                                                        The noise sources are a
                                                                      number of logic gates and
                                                                      inverters, as shown on top.
                                                                      A smaller or larger number
                                                                      of logic gates can be
                                                                      switched in.



                                                                    2454
                                                                    The noise voltage is mea-
                                                                    sured at the output of the
                                                                    analog ampliﬁer structure.
                                                                       It is clear that the single-
                                                                    ended ampliﬁer is much
                                                                    more sensitive to the digital
                                                                    noise than the fully-diﬀer-
                                                                    ential one.
                                                                       Increasing the supply
                                                                    voltage increases the cur-
                                                                    rents in the logic gates and
                                                                    also the spike current
                                                                    transfer to the analog cir-
                                                                    cuits. This is clearly visible
                                                                    on the right. Even the
                                                                    diﬀerential noise pick up
increases rather drastically. This is probably due to mismatch in substrate contacts.
  Quite often many sources of mismatch are often overlooked. For example for a fully-diﬀerential
input stage of an opamp, good matching not only requires perfectly symmetrical layout but also
identical surroundings. For example, the substrate contacts of the input transistors must also
have the same size and an equal distance to the axis of symmetry. If not, diﬀerent substrate
resistances result, and diﬀerent body eﬀects.
